An adaptive website is a website that builds a model of user activity
and modifies the information and/or presentation of information to the
user in order to better address the user\'s needs. Overview An adaptive
website adjusts the structure, content, or presentation of information
in response to measured user interaction with the site, with the
objective of optimizing future user interactions. Adaptive websites
\"are web sites that automatically improve their organization and
presentation by learning from their user access patterns.\" User
interaction patterns may be collected directly on the website or may be
mined from Web server logs. A model or models are created of user
interaction using artificial intelligence and statistical methods. The
models are used as the basis for tailoring the website for known and
specific patterns of user interaction. Techniques The collaborative
filtering method: Collected user data may be assessed in aggregate
(across multiple users) using machine learning techniques to cluster
interaction patterns to user models and classify specific user patterns
to such models. The website may then be adapted to target clusters of
users. In this approach, the models are explicitly created from historic
user information with new users are classified to an existing model and
a pre-defined mapping is used for existing content and content
organization. The statistical hypothesis testing method: A/B testing or
similar methods are used in conjunction with a library of possible
changes to the website or a change-generation method (such as random
variation). This results in the automated process website change, impact
assessment, and adoption of change. Some examples include genetify for
website look and feel, and snap ads for online advertising. In this
approach (specifically genetify), the model is represented implicitly in
the population of possible sites and adapted for all users that visit
the site. Differentiation User landing pages (such as iGoogle) that
allow the user to customize the presented content are not adaptive
websites as they rely on the user to select rather than the automation
of the selection and presentation of the web widget\'s that appear on
the website. Collaborative filtering such as recommender systems,
generate and test methods such as A/B testing, and machine learning
techniques such as clustering and classification that are used on a
website do not make it an adaptive website. They are all tools and
techniques that may be used toward engineering an adaptive website. See
also Machine learning Responsive web design Web intelligence Notes
References J.D. Vel√°squez and V. Palade, \"Adaptive Web Sites: A
Knowledge Extraction from Web Data Approach\", IOS Press, 2008 Mike
Perkowitz, Oren Etzioni, \"Towards adaptive Web sites: Conceptual
framework and case study\", Artificial Intelligence 118(1-2), 2000
