Anthropic is an American artificial intelligence (AI) startup and
public-benefit corporation, founded by former members of OpenAI.
Anthropic specializes in developing general AI systems and language
models, with a company ethos of responsible AI usage. Since late 2022,
Google has invested nearly \$400 million in the company, with Anthropic
announcing a formal partnership with Google Cloud. History Anthropic was
founded in 2021 by former senior members of OpenAI, principally siblings
Daniela Amodei and Dario Amodei, the latter whom served as OpenAI\'s
Vice President of Research. The Amodei siblings were among others who
left OpenAI due to directional differences, specifically regarding
OpenAI\'s ventures with Microsoft in 2019. In February 2023, Anthropic
was sued by Texas-based Anthrop LLC for use of their registered
trademark \"Anthropic A.I.\" Projects Claude Consisting of former
researchers involved in OpenAI\'s ChatGPT, Anthropic began development
on its own AI chatbot, named Claude. Similar to ChatGPT, Claude uses a
messaging interface where users can submit questions or requests and
receive highly detailed and relevant responses.Initially available in
closed beta through a Slack integration, Claude is now accessible to
users via the Poe app by Quora along with two other chatbots. The app is
currently available for iOS and will soon be available for Android.
Interpretability research Anthropic also publishes research on the
interpretability of machine learning systems, focusing on the
transformer architecture. == References ==
