In artificial intelligence, artificial immune systems (AIS) are a class
of computationally intelligent, rule-based machine learning systems
inspired by the principles and processes of the vertebrate immune
system. The algorithms are typically modeled after the immune system\'s
characteristics of learning and memory for use in problem-solving.
Definition The field of artificial immune systems (AIS) is concerned
with abstracting the structure and function of the immune system to
computational systems, and investigating the application of these
systems towards solving computational problems from mathematics,
engineering, and information technology. AIS is a sub-field of
biologically inspired computing, and natural computation, with interests
in machine learning and belonging to the broader field of artificial
intelligence. Artificial immune systems (AIS) are adaptive systems,
inspired by theoretical immunology and observed immune functions,
principles and models, which are applied to problem solving. AIS is
distinct from computational immunology and theoretical biology that are
concerned with simulating immunology using computational and
mathematical models towards better understanding the immune system,
although such models initiated the field of AIS and continue to provide
a fertile ground for inspiration. Finally, the field of AIS is not
concerned with the investigation of the immune system as a substrate for
computation, unlike other fields such as DNA computing. History AIS
emerged in the mid-1980s with articles authored by Farmer, Packard and
Perelson (1986) and Bersini and Varela (1990) on immune networks.
However, it was only in the mid-1990s that AIS became a field in its own
right. Forrest et al. (on negative selection) and Kephart et al.
published their first papers on AIS in 1994, and Dasgupta conducted
extensive studies on Negative Selection Algorithms. Hunt and Cooke
started the works on Immune Network models in 1995; Timmis and Neal
continued this work and made some improvements. De Castro & Von Zuben\'s
and Nicosia & Cutello\'s work (on clonal selection) became notable in
2002. The first book on Artificial Immune Systems was edited by Dasgupta
in 1999. Currently, new ideas along AIS lines, such as danger theory and
algorithms inspired by the innate immune system, are also being
explored. Although some believe that these new ideas do not yet offer
any truly \'new\' abstract, over and above existing AIS algorithms.
This, however, is hotly debated, and the debate provides one of the main
driving forces for AIS development at the moment. Other recent
developments involve the exploration of degeneracy in AIS models, which
is motivated by its hypothesized role in open ended learning and
evolution.Originally AIS set out to find efficient abstractions of
processes found in the immune system but, more recently, it is becoming
interested in modelling the biological processes and in applying immune
algorithms to bioinformatics problems. In 2008, Dasgupta and Nino
published a textbook on immunological computation which presents a
compendium of up-to-date work related to immunity-based techniques and
describes a wide variety of applications. Techniques The common
techniques are inspired by specific immunological theories that explain
the function and behavior of the mammalian adaptive immune system.
Clonal selection algorithm: A class of algorithms inspired by the clonal
selection theory of acquired immunity that explains how B and T
lymphocytes improve their response to antigens over time called affinity
maturation. These algorithms focus on the Darwinian attributes of the
theory where selection is inspired by the affinity of antigen--antibody
interactions, reproduction is inspired by cell division, and variation
is inspired by somatic hypermutation. Clonal selection algorithms are
most commonly applied to optimization and pattern recognition domains,
some of which resemble parallel hill climbing and the genetic algorithm
without the recombination operator. Negative selection algorithm:
Inspired by the positive and negative selection processes that occur
during the maturation of T cells in the thymus called T cell tolerance.
Negative selection refers to the identification and deletion (apoptosis)
of self-reacting cells, that is T cells that may select for and attack
self tissues. This class of algorithms are typically used for
classification and pattern recognition problem domains where the problem
space is modeled in the complement of available knowledge. For example,
in the case of an anomaly detection domain the algorithm prepares a set
of exemplar pattern detectors trained on normal (non-anomalous) patterns
that model and detect unseen or anomalous patterns. Immune network
algorithms: Algorithms inspired by the idiotypic network theory proposed
by Niels Kaj Jerne that describes the regulation of the immune system by
anti-idiotypic antibodies (antibodies that select for other antibodies).
This class of algorithms focus on the network graph structures involved
where antibodies (or antibody producing cells) represent the nodes and
the training algorithm involves growing or pruning edges between the
nodes based on affinity (similarity in the problems representation
space). Immune network algorithms have been used in clustering, data
visualization, control, and optimization domains, and share properties
with artificial neural networks. Dendritic cell algorithms: The
dendritic cell algorithm (DCA) is an example of an immune inspired
algorithm developed using a multi-scale approach. This algorithm is
based on an abstract model of dendritic cells (DCs). The DCA is
abstracted and implemented through a process of examining and modeling
various aspects of DC function, from the molecular networks present
within the cell to the behaviour exhibited by a population of cells as a
whole. Within the DCA information is granulated at different layers,
achieved through multi-scale processing. See also Biologically inspired
computing Computational immunology Computational intelligence
Evolutionary computation Immunocomputing Natural computation Swarm
intelligence Learning classifier system Rule-based machine learning
Notes References J.D. Farmer, N. Packard and A. Perelson, (1986) \"The
immune system, adaptation and machine learning\", Physica D, vol. 2, pp.
187--204 H. Bersini, F.J. Varela, Hints for adaptive problem solving
gleaned from immune networks. Parallel Problem Solving from Nature,
First Workshop PPSW 1, Dortmund, FRG, October, 1990. D. Dasgupta
(Editor), Artificial Immune Systems and Their Applications,
Springer-Verlag, Inc. Berlin, January 1999, ISBN 3-540-64390-7 V.
Cutello and G. Nicosia (2002) \"An Immunological Approach to
Combinatorial Optimization Problems\" Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
Springer vol. 2527, pp. 361--370. L. N. de Castro and F. J. Von Zuben,
(1999) \"Artificial Immune Systems: Part I -Basic Theory and
Applications\", School of Computing and Electrical Engineering, State
University of Campinas, Brazil, No. DCA-RT 01/99. S. Garrett (2005)
\"How Do We Evaluate Artificial Immune Systems?\" Evolutionary
Computation, vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 145--178.
http://mitpress.mit.edu/journals/pdf/EVCO_13_2_145_0.pdf Archived
2011-06-29 at the Wayback Machine V. Cutello, G. Nicosia, M. Pavone, J.
Timmis (2007) An Immune Algorithm for Protein Structure Prediction on
Lattice Models, IEEE Transactions on Evolutionary Computation, vol. 11,
no. 1, pp. 101--117.
https://web.archive.org/web/20120208130715/http://www.dmi.unict.it/nicosia/papers/journals/Nicosia-IEEE-TEVC07.pdf
Villalobos-Arias M., Coello C.A.C., Hern√°ndez-Lerma O. (2004)
Convergence Analysis of a Multiobjective Artificial Immune System
Algorithm. In: Nicosia G., Cutello V., Bentley P.J., Timmis J. (eds)
Artificial Immune Systems. ICARIS 2004. Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, vol 3239. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg. DOI
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-30220-9_19 External links AISWeb: The
Online Home of Artificial Immune Systems Information about AIS in
general and links to a variety of resources including ICARIS conference
series, code, teaching material and algorithm descriptions. ARTIST:
Network for Artificial Immune Systems Provides information about the UK
AIS network, ARTIST. It provides technical and financial support for AIS
in the UK and beyond, and aims to promote AIS projects. Computer Immune
Systems Group at the University of New Mexico led by Stephanie Forrest.
AIS: Artificial Immune Systems Group at the University of Memphis led by
Dipankar Dasgupta. IBM Antivirus Research Early work in AIS for computer
security.
