The Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) is a scientific and
professional organization for people working on natural language
processing. Its namesake conference is one of the primary high impact
conferences for natural language processing research, along with EMNLP.
The conference is held each summer in locations where significant
computational linguistics research is carried out. It was founded in
1962, originally named the Association for Machine Translation and
Computational Linguistics (AMTCL). It became the ACL in 1968. The ACL
has a European (EACL), a North American (NAACL), and an Asian (AACL)
chapter. History The ACL was founded in 1962 as the Association for
Machine Translation and Computational Linguistics (AMTCL). The initial
membership was about 100. In 1965 the AMTCL took over the journal
Mechanical Translation and Computational Linguistics. This journal was
succeeded by many other journals: American Journal of Computational
Linguistics (1974---1978, 1980---1983), and then Computational
Linguistics (1984---present). Since 1988, the journal has been published
for the ACL by MIT Press.The annual meeting was first held in 1963 in
conjunction with the Association for Computing Machinery National
Conference. The annual meeting was, for much time, relatively informal
and did not publish anything lengthier than abstracts. By 1968, the
society took on its current name, the Association for Computational
Linguistics (ACL). The publishing of the annual meeting\'s Proceedings
of the ACL began in 1979, and gradually matured into its modern form.
Many of the meetings were held in conjunction with the Linguistic
Society of America, and a few with the American Society for Information
Science and Cognitive Science Society.The United States government
sponsored much research from 1989 to 1994, leading to a maturing of the
ACL, characterized by an increase in author retention rates and an
increase in research in some key topics, such as speech recognition. By
the 21st century, the society was able to maintain authors at a high
rate who coalesced in a more stable arrangement around individual
research topics.In 2020, the annual meeting of the ACL for the first
time received more submissions from China than from the United States,
reflecting the increasing geographical diversity of the society.
Conference Locations ACL 2023, Toronto, Canada ACL 2022, Dublin, Ireland
ACL 2021, Bangkok, Thailand (moved online due to COVID-19) ACL 2020,
originally Seattle, Washington, United States (moved online due to
COVID-19) ACL 2019, Florence, Italy ACL 2018, Melbourne, Australia ACL
2017, Vancouver, CanadaRef Activities The ACL organizes several of the
top conferences and workshops in the field of computational linguistics
and natural language processing. These include: Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), the flagship conference
of the organization Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing
(EMNLP) International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing
(IJCNLP), held jointly one of the other conferences on a rotating basis
Conference on Computational Natural Language Learning (CoNLL) Lexical
and Computational Semantics and Semantic Evaluation (SemEval) Joint
Conference on Lexical and Computational Semantics (\*SEM) Workshop on
Statistical Machine Translation (WMT)Besides conferences, the ACL also
sponsors the journals Computational Linguistics and Transactions of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (TACL). Papers and other
presentations at ACL and ACL-affiliated venues are archived online in
the open-access ACL Anthology. Special Interest Groups ACL has a large
number of Special Interest Groups (SIGs), focusing on specific areas of
natural language processing. Some current SIGs within ACL are:
Presidents Each year the ACL elects a distinguished computational
linguist who becomes vice-president of the organization in the next
calendar year and president one year later. Recent ACL presidents are:
References External links Official website ACL Anthology ACL Wiki EACL
NAACL AACL
