Automated machine learning (AutoML) is the process of automating the
tasks of applying machine learning to real-world problems. AutoML
potentially includes every stage from beginning with a raw dataset to
building a machine learning model ready for deployment. AutoML was
proposed as an artificial intelligence-based solution to the growing
challenge of applying machine learning. The high degree of automation in
AutoML aims to allow non-experts to make use of machine learning models
and techniques without requiring them to become experts in machine
learning. Automating the process of applying machine learning end-to-end
additionally offers the advantages of producing simpler solutions,
faster creation of those solutions, and models that often outperform
hand-designed models. Common techniques used in AutoML include
hyperparameter optimization, meta-learning and neural architecture
search. Comparison to the standard approach In a typical machine
learning application, practitioners have a set of input data points to
be used for training. The raw data may not be in a form that all
algorithms can be applied to. To make the data amenable for machine
learning, an expert may have to apply appropriate data pre-processing,
feature engineering, feature extraction, and feature selection methods.
After these steps, practitioners must then perform algorithm selection
and hyperparameter optimization to maximize the predictive performance
of their model. If deep learning is used, the architecture of the neural
network must also be chosen by the machine learning expert. Each of
these steps may be challenging, resulting in significant hurdles to
using machine learning. AutoML aims to simplify these steps for
non-experts, and to make it easier for them to use machine learning
techniques correctly and effectively. AutoML plays an important role
within the broader approach of automating data science, which also
includes challenging tasks such as data engineering, data exploration
and model interpretation. Targets of automation Automated machine
learning can target various stages of the machine learning process.
Steps to automate are: Data preparation and ingestion (from raw data and
miscellaneous formats) Column type detection; e.g., boolean, discrete
numerical, continuous numerical, or text Column intent detection; e.g.,
target/label, stratification field, numerical feature, categorical text
feature, or free text feature Task detection; e.g., binary
classification, regression, clustering, or ranking Feature engineering
Feature selection Feature extraction Meta-learning and transfer learning
Detection and handling of skewed data and/or missing values Model
selection - choosing which machine learning algorithm to use, often
including multiple competing software implementations Ensembling - a
form of consensus where using multiple models often gives better results
than any single model Hyperparameter optimization of the learning
algorithm and featurization Pipeline selection under time, memory, and
complexity constraints Selection of evaluation metrics and validation
procedures Problem checking Leakage detection Misconfiguration detection
Analysis of obtained results Creating user interfaces and visualizations
See also Neural architecture search Neuroevolution Self-tuning Neural
Network Intelligence AutoAI ModelOps References Further reading \"Open
Source AutoML Tools: AutoGluon, TransmogrifAI, Auto-sklearn, and NNI\".
Bizety. 2020-06-16. Ferreira, Lu√≠s, et al. \"A comparison of AutoML
tools for machine learning, deep learning and XGBoost.\" 2021
International Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN). IEEE, 2021.
https://repositorium.sdum.uminho.pt/bitstream/1822/74125/1/automl_ijcnn.pdf
