Auto-GPT is an \"AI agent\" that given a goal in natural language, will
attempt to achieve it by breaking it into sub-tasks and using the
internet and other tools in an automatic loop. It uses OpenAI\'s GPT-4
or GPT-3.5 APIs, and is among the first examples of an application using
GPT-4 to perform autonomous tasks. Details Unlike interactive systems
such as ChatGPT, which require manual commands for every task, Auto-GPT
assigns itself new objectives to work on with the aim of reaching a
greater goal, without a mandatory need for human input. It is able to
execute responses to prompts to accomplish a goal task, and in doing so
will create and revise its own prompts to recursive instances in
response to new information. It manages short-term and long-term memory
by writing to and reading from databases and files; manages context
window length requirements with summarization; can perform
internet-based actions such as web searching, web form, and API
interactions unattended; and includes text-to-speech for voice
output.Observers tout Auto-GPT\'s ability to write, debug, test, and
edit code, even suggesting this ability may extend to Auto-GPT\'s own
source code enabling self-improvement. However, as its underlying GPT
models are proprietary, Auto-GPT cannot modify them, and it does not
ordinarily have access to its own base system code. Background On March
14, 2023, OpenAI released the large language model GPT-4. Observers were
impressed by the model\'s substantially improved performance across a
wide range of tasks. As a text prediction model, GPT-4 itself has no
ability to perform actions autonomously, but during pre-release safety
testing red-team researchers found GPT-4 could be enabled to perform
actions in the real world like convincing a TaskRabbit worker to solve a
CAPTCHA challenge for it. A team of Microsoft researchers argued that,
given GPT-4\'s breadth of abilities at levels approaching those of
humans, GPT-4 \"could reasonably be viewed as an early (yet still
incomplete) version of an artificial general intelligence (AGI)
system.\" The researchers emphasized their experiments also found
significant limitations in the system.Auto-GPT was released March 30,
2023 by Toran Bruce Richards, the founder of video game company
Significant Gravitas Ltd. It became the top trending repository on
GitHub shortly after its release, and has repeatedly trended on Twitter
since. Issues Whether Auto-GPT will find practical applications is
uncertain. In addition to being plagued by confabulatory
\"hallucinations\" of the underlying large language models upon which it
is based, Auto-GPT often also has trouble staying on task, both problems
which developers continue to try to address. After successfully
completing a task, it usually does not remember how to perform it for
later use, and when it does, for example when it writes a program, it
often forgets to use the program later. Auto-GPT struggles to
effectively decompose tasks and has trouble understanding problem
contexts and how goals overlap. Applications Developers have created
AgentGPT, which integrates AutoGPT into one\'s web browser, allowing
non-programmers to make their own agents. Auto-GPT was also used to
create ChaosGPT, given the goal of destroying humanity, which was not
immediately successful in doing so. References Further reading Pounder,
Les (April 15, 2023). \"How To Create Your Own Auto-GPT AI Agent\".
Tom\'s Hardware. Retrieved April 16, 2023. Wiggers, Kyle (April 22,
2023). \"What is Auto-GPT and why does it matter?\". TechCrunch.
Retrieved April 23, 2023. External links Official Website Official
repository at GitHub
