In mathematics, a basis function is an element of a particular basis for
a function space. Every function in the function space can be
represented as a linear combination of basis functions, just as every
vector in a vector space can be represented as a linear combination of
basis vectors. In numerical analysis and approximation theory, basis
functions are also called blending functions, because of their use in
interpolation: In this application, a mixture of the basis functions
provides an interpolating function (with the \"blend\" depending on the
evaluation of the basis functions at the data points). Examples Monomial
basis for Cω The monomial basis for the vector space of analytic
functions is given by This basis is used in Taylor series, amongst
others. Monomial basis for polynomials The monomial basis also forms a
basis for the vector space of polynomials. After all, every polynomial
can be written as a 0 + a 1 x 1 + a 2 x 2 + ⋯ + a n x n {\\displaystyle
a\_{0}+a\_{1}x\^{1}+a\_{2}x\^{2}+\\cdots +a\_{n}x\^{n}} for some n ∈ N
{\\displaystyle n\\in \\mathbb {N} } , which is a linear combination of
monomials. Fourier basis for L2\[0,1\] Sines and cosines form an
(orthonormal) Schauder basis for square-integrable functions on a
bounded domain. As a particular example, the collection forms a basis
for L2\[0,1\]. See also References Itô, Kiyosi (1993). Encyclopedic
Dictionary of Mathematics (2nd ed.). MIT Press. p. 1141. ISBN
0-262-59020-4.
