Citizen science (similar to community science, crowd science,
crowd-sourced science, civic science, participatory monitoring, or
volunteer monitoring) is scientific research conducted with
participation from the general public (who are sometimes referred to as
amateur/nonprofessional scientists). There are variations in the exact
definition of citizen science, with different individuals and
organizations having their own specific interpretations of what citizen
science encompasses. Citizen science is used in a wide range of areas of
study, with most citizen science research publications being in the
fields of biology and conservation. There are different applications and
functions of citizen science in research projects. Citizen science can
be used as a methodology where public volunteers help in collecting and
classifying data, improving the scientific community\'s capacity.
Citizen science can also involve more direct involvement from the
public, with communities initiating projects researching environment and
health hazards in their own communities. Participation in citizen
science projects also educates the public about the scientific process
and increases awareness about different topics. Some schools have
students participate in citizen science projects for this purpose as a
part of the teaching curriculums. The first use of the term \"citizen
science\" can be found in a January 1989 issue of MIT Technology Review,
which featured three community-based labs studying environmental issues.
In the 21st century, the number of citizen science projects,
publications, and funding opportunities has increased. Citizen science
has been used more over time, a trend helped by technological
advancements. Digital citizen science platforms, such as Zooniverse,
store large amounts of data for many projects and are a place where
volunteers can learn how to contribute to projects. For some projects,
participants are instructed to collect and enter data, such as what
species they observed, into large digital global databases. For other
projects, participants help classify data on digital platforms. Citizen
science data is also being used to develop machine learning algorithms.
An example is using volunteer-classified images to train machine
learning algorithms to identify species. While global participation and
global databases are found on online platforms, not all locations always
have the same amount of data from contributors. Concerns over potential
data quality issues, such as measurement errors and biases, in citizen
science projects are recognized in the scientific community and there
are statistical solutions and best practices available which can help.
Definition The term \"citizen science\" has multiple origins, as well as
differing concepts. \"Citizen\" is used in the general sense, as meaning
in \"citizen of the world\", or the general public, rather than legal
the term citizen of sovereign countries. It was first defined
independently in the mid-1990s by Rick Bonney in the United States and
Alan Irwin in the United Kingdom. Alan Irwin, a British sociologist,
defines citizen science as \"developing concepts of scientific
citizenship which foregrounds the necessity of opening up science and
science policy processes to the public\". Irwin sought to reclaim two
dimensions of the relationship between citizens and science: 1) that
science should be responsive to citizens\' concerns and needs; and 2)
that citizens themselves could produce reliable scientific knowledge.
The American ornithologist Rick Bonney, unaware of Irwin\'s work,
defined citizen science as projects in which nonscientists, such as
amateur birdwatchers, voluntarily contributed scientific data. This
describes a more limited role for citizens in scientific research than
Irwin\'s conception of the term. The terms citizen science and citizen
scientists entered the Oxford English Dictionary (OED) in June 2014.
\"Citizen science\" is defined as \"scientific work undertaken by
members of the general public, often in collaboration with or under the
direction of professional scientists and scientific institutions\".
\"Citizen scientist\" is defined as: (a) \"a scientist whose work is
characterized by a sense of responsibility to serve the best interests
of the wider community (now rare)\"; or (b) \"a member of the general
public who engages in scientific work, often in collaboration with or
under the direction of professional scientists and scientific
institutions; an amateur scientist\". The first use of the term
\"citizen scientist\" can be found in the magazine New Scientist in an
article about ufology from October 1979. Muki Haklay cites, from a
policy report for the Wilson Center entitled \"Citizen Science and
Policy: A European Perspective\", an alternate first use of the term
\"citizen science\" by R. Kerson in the magazine MIT Technology Review
from January 1989. Quoting from the Wilson Center report: \"The new form
of engagement in science received the name \'citizen science\'. The
first recorded example of the use of the term is from 1989, describing
how 225 volunteers across the US collected rain samples to assist the
Audubon Society in an acid-rain awareness raising campaign.\"A \"Green
Paper on Citizen Science\" was published in 2013 by the European
Commission\'s Digital Science Unit and Socientize.eu, which included a
definition for citizen science, referring to \"the general public
engagement in scientific research activities when citizens actively
contribute to science either with their intellectual effort or
surrounding knowledge or with their tools and resources. Participants
provide experimental data and facilities for researchers, raise new
questions and co-create a new scientific culture.\"Citizen science may
be performed by individuals, teams, or networks of volunteers. Citizen
scientists often partner with professional scientists to achieve common
goals. Large volunteer networks often allow scientists to accomplish
tasks that would be too expensive or time-consuming to accomplish
through other means.Many citizen-science projects serve education and
outreach goals. These projects may be designed for a formal classroom
environment or an informal education environment such as museums.
Citizen science has evolved over the past four decades. Recent projects
place more emphasis on scientifically sound practices and measurable
goals for public education. Modern citizen science differs from its
historical forms primarily in the access for, and subsequent scale of,
public participation; technology is credited as one of the main drivers
of the recent explosion of citizen science activity.In March 2015, the
Office of Science and Technology Policy published a factsheet entitled
\"Empowering Students and Others through Citizen Science and
Crowdsourcing\". Quoting: \"Citizen science and crowdsourcing projects
are powerful tools for providing students with skills needed to excel in
science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM). Volunteers in citizen
science, for example, gain hands-on experience doing real science, and
in many cases take that learning outside of the traditional classroom
setting\". The National Academies of Science cites SciStarter as a
platform offering access to more than 2,700 citizen science projects and
events, as well as helping interested parties access tools that
facilitate project participation. In May 2016, a new open-access journal
was started by the Citizen Science Association along with Ubiquity Press
called Citizen Science: Theory and Practice (CS:T&P). Quoting from the
editorial article titled \"The Theory and Practice of Citizen Science:
Launching a New Journal\", \"CS:T&P provides the space to enhance the
quality and impact of citizen science efforts by deeply exploring the
citizen science concept in all its forms and across disciplines. By
examining, critiquing, and sharing findings across a variety of citizen
science endeavors, we can dig into the underpinnings and assumptions of
citizen science and critically analyze its practice and outcomes.\"In
February 2020, Timber Press, an imprint of Workman Publishing Company,
published The Field Guide to Citizen Science as a practical guide for
anyone interested in getting started with citizen science. Alternative
definitions Other definitions for citizen science have also been
proposed. For example, Bruce Lewenstein of Cornell University\'s
Communication and S&TS departments describes three possible definitions:
The participation of nonscientists in the process of gathering data
according to specific scientific protocols and in the process of using
and interpreting that data. The engagement of nonscientists in true
decision-making about policy issues that have technical or scientific
components. The engagement of research scientists in the democratic and
policy process.Scientists and scholars who have used other definitions
include Frank N. von Hippel, Stephen Schneider, Neal Lane and Jon
Beckwith. Other alternative terminologies proposed are \"civic science\"
and \"civic scientist\".Further, Muki Haklay offers an overview of the
typologies of the level of citizen participation in citizen science,
which range from \"crowdsourcing\" (level 1), where the citizen acts as
a sensor, to \"distributed intelligence\" (level 2), where the citizen
acts as a basic interpreter, to \"participatory science\", where
citizens contribute to problem definition and data collection (level 3),
to \"extreme citizen science\", which involves collaboration between the
citizen and scientists in problem definition, collection and data
analysis.A 2014 Mashable article defines a citizen scientist as:
\"Anybody who voluntarily contributes his or her time and resources
toward scientific research in partnership with professional
scientists.\"In 2016 the Australian Citizen Science Association released
their definition which states \"Citizen science involves public
participation and collaboration in scientific research with the aim to
increase scientific knowledge.\"In 2020, a group of birders in the
Pacific Northwest of North America, eBird Northwest, has sought to
rename \"citizen science\" to the use of \"community science\",
\"largely to avoid using the word \'citizen\' when we want to be
inclusive and welcoming to any birder or person who wants to learn more
about bird watching, regardless of their citizen status.\" Related
fields In a Smart City era, Citizen Science relays on various web-based
tools, such as WebGIS, and becomes Cyber Citizen Science. Some projects,
such as SETI@home, use the Internet to take advantage of distributed
computing. These projects are generally passive. Computation tasks are
performed by volunteers\' computers and require little involvement
beyond initial setup. There is disagreement as to whether these projects
should be classified as citizen science. The astrophysicist and Galaxy
Zoo co-founder Kevin Schawinski stated: \"We prefer to call this
\[Galaxy Zoo\] citizen science because it\'s a better description of
what you\'re doing; you\'re a regular citizen but you\'re doing science.
Crowd sourcing sounds a bit like, well, you\'re just a member of the
crowd and you\'re not; you\'re our collaborator. You\'re pro-actively
involved in the process of science by participating.\"Compared to
SETI@home, \"Galaxy Zoo volunteers do real work. They\'re not just
passively running something on their computer and hoping that they\'ll
be the first person to find aliens. They have a stake in science that
comes out of it, which means that they are now interested in what we do
with it, and what we find.\"Citizen policy may be another result of
citizen science initiatives. Bethany Brookshire (pen name SciCurious)
writes: \"If citizens are going to live with the benefits or potential
consequences of science (as the vast majority of them will), it\'s
incredibly important to make sure that they are not only well informed
about changes and advances in science and technology, but that they also
\... are able to \... influence the science policy decisions that could
impact their lives.\" In \"The Rightful Place of Science: Citizen
Science\", editors Darlene Cavalier and Eric Kennedy highlight emerging
connections between citizen science, civic science, and participatory
technology assessment. Benefits and limitations The general public\'s
involvement in scientific projects has become a means of encouraging
curiosity and greater understanding of science while providing an
unprecedented engagement between professional scientists and the general
public. In a research report published by the U.S. National Park Service
in 2008, Brett Amy Thelen and Rachel K. Thiet mention the following
concerns, previously reported in the literature, about the validity of
volunteer-generated data: Some projects may not be suitable for
volunteers, for instance, when they use complex research methods or
require a great deal of (often repetitive) work. If volunteers lack
proper training in research and monitoring protocols, the data they
collect might introduce bias into the dataset.The question of data
accuracy, in particular, remains open. John Losey, who created the Lost
Ladybug citizen science project, has argued that the cost-effectiveness
of citizen science data can outweigh data quality issues, if properly
managed.In December 2016, authors M. Kosmala, A. Wiggins, A. Swanson and
B. Simmons published a study in the journal Frontiers in Ecology and the
Environment called \"Assessing Data Quality in Citizen Science\". The
abstract describes how ecological and environmental citizen science
projects have enormous potential to advance science. Citizen science
projects can influence policy and guide resource management by producing
datasets that are otherwise not feasible to generate. In the section
\"In a Nutshell\" (pg3), four condensed conclusions are stated. They
are: They conclude that as citizen science continues to grow and mature,
a key metric of project success they expect to see will be a growing
awareness of data quality. They also conclude that citizen science will
emerge as a general tool helping \"to collect otherwise unobtainable
high-quality data in support of policy and resource management,
conservation monitoring, and basic science.\"A study of Canadian
lepidoptera datasets published in 2018 compared the use of a
professionally curated dataset of butterfly specimen records with four
years of data from a citizen science program, eButterfly. The eButterfly
dataset was used as it was determined to be of high quality because of
the expert vetting process used on site, and there already existed a
dataset covering the same geographic area consisting of specimen data,
much of it institutional. The authors note that, in this case, citizen
science data provides both novel and complementary information to the
specimen data. Five new species were reported from the citizen science
data, and geographic distribution information was improved for over 80%
of species in the combined dataset when citizen science data was
included. Several recent studies have begun to explore the accuracy of
citizen science projects and how to predict accuracy based on variables
like expertise of practitioners. One example is a 2021 study by Edgar
Santos-Fernandez and Kerrie Mengersen of the British Ecological Society,
who utilized a case study which used recent R and Stan programming
software to offer ratings of the accuracy of species identifications
performed by citizen scientists in Serengeti National Park, Tanzania.
This provided insight into possible problems with processes like this
which include, \"discriminatory power and guessing behaviour\". The
researchers determined that methods for rating the citizen scientists
themselves based on skill level and expertise might make studies they
conduct more easy to analyze.Studies that are simple in execution are
where citizen science excels, particularly in the field of conservation
biology and ecology. For example, in 2019, Sumner et al. compared the
data of vespid wasp distributions collected by citizen scientists with
the 4-decade, long-term dataset established by the BWARS. They set up
the Big Wasp Survey from 26 August to 10 September 2017, inviting
citizen scientists to trap wasps and send them for identification by
experts where data was recorded. The results of this study showed that
the campaign garnered over 2000 citizen scientists participating in data
collection, identifying over 6600 wasps. This experiment provides strong
evidence that citizen science can generate potentially high-quality data
comparable to that of expert data collection, within a shorter time
frame. Although the experiment was to originally test the strength of
citizen science, the team also learned more about Vespidae biology and
species distribution in the United Kingdom. With this study, the simple
procedure enabled citizen science to be executed in a successful manner.
A study by J. Cohn describes that volunteers can be trained to use
equipment and process data, especially considering that a large
proportion of citizen scientists are individuals who are already
well-versed in the field of science.The demographics of participants in
citizen science projects are overwhelmingly White adults, of
above-average income, having a university degree. Other groups of
volunteers include conservationists, outdoor enthusiasts, and amateur
scientists. As such, citizen scientists are generally individuals with a
pre-understanding of the scientific method and how to conduct sensible
and just scientific analysis. Ethics Various studies have been published
that explore the ethics of citizen science, including issues such as
intellectual property and project design.(e.g.) The Citizen Science
Association (CSA), based at the Cornell Lab of Ornithology, and the
European Citizen Science Association (ECSA), based in the Museum für
Naturkunde in Berlin, have working groups on ethics and principles.In
September 2015, ECSA published its Ten Principles of Citizen Science,
which have been developed by the \"Sharing best practice and building
capacity\" working group of ECSA, led by the Natural History Museum,
London with input from many members of the association. The medical
ethics of internet crowdsourcing has been questioned by Graber & Graber
in the Journal of Medical Ethics. In particular, they analyse the effect
of games and the crowdsourcing project Foldit. They conclude: \"games
can have possible adverse effects, and that they manipulate the user
into participation\". In March 2019 the online journal Citizen Science:
Theory and Practice launched a collection of articles on the theme of
Ethical Issues in Citizen Science. The articles are introduced with
(quoting): \"Citizen science can challenge existing ethical norms
because it falls outside of customary methods of ensuring that research
is conducted ethically. What ethical issues arise when engaging the
public in research? How have these issues been addressed, and how should
they be addressed in the future?\"In June 2019, East Asian Science,
Technology and Society: An International Journal (EASTS) published an
issue titled \"Citizen Science: Practices and Problems\" which contains
15 articles/studies on citizen science, including many relevant subjects
of which ethics is one. Quoting from the introduction \"Citizen,
Science, and Citizen Science\": \"The term citizen science has become
very popular among scholars as well as the general public, and, given
its growing presence in East Asia, it is perhaps not a moment too soon
to have a special issue of EASTS on the topic.\"Use of citizen science
volunteers as de facto unpaid laborers by some commercial ventures have
been criticized as exploitative.: 122 Ethics in citizen science in the
health and welfare field, has been discussed in terms of protection
versus participation. Public involvement researcher Kristin Liabo writes
that health researcher might, in light of their ethics training, be
inclined to exclude vulnerable individuals from participation, to
protect them from harm. However, she argues these groups are already
likely to be excluded from participation in other arenas, and that
participation can be empowering and a possibility to gain life skills
that these individuals need. Whether or not to become involved should be
a decision these individuals should be involved in and not a researcher
decision. Economic worth In the research paper \"Can citizen science
enhance public understanding of science?\" by Bonney et al. 2016,
statistics which analyse the economic worth of citizen science are used,
drawn from two papers: i) Sauermann and Franzoni 2015, and ii)Theobald
et al. 2015. In \"Crowd science user contribution patterns and their
implications\" by Sauermann and Franzoni (2015), seven projects from the
Zooniverse web portal are used to estimate the monetary value of the
citizen science that had taken place. The seven projects are: Solar
Stormwatch, Galaxy Zoo Supernovae, Galaxy Zoo Hubble, Moon Zoo, Old
Weather, The Milky Way Project and Planet Hunters. Using data from 180
days in 2010, they find a total of 100,386 users participated,
contributing 129,540 hours of unpaid work. Estimating at a rate of \$12
an hour (an undergraduate research assistant\'s basic wage), the total
contributions amount to \$1,554,474, an average of \$222,068 per
project. The range over the seven projects was from \$22,717 to
\$654,130.In \"Global change and local solutions: Tapping the unrealized
potential of citizen science for biodiversity research\" by Theobald et
al. 2015, the authors surveyed 388 unique biodiversity-based projects.
Quoting: \"We estimate that between 1.36 million and 2.28 million people
volunteer annually in the 388 projects we surveyed, though variation is
great\" and that \"the range of in-kind contribution of the volunteerism
in our 388 citizen science projects as between \$667 million to \$2.5
billion annually.\"Worldwide participation in citizen science continues
to grow. A list of the top five citizen science communities compiled by
Marc Kuchner and Kristen Erickson in July 2018 shows a total of 3.75
million participants, although there is likely substantial overlap
between the communities. Relations with education and academia There
have been studies published which examine the place of citizen science
within education.(e.g.) Teaching aids can include books and activity or
lesson plans.(e.g.). Some examples of studies are: From the Second
International Handbook of Science Education, a chapter entitled:
\"Citizen Science, Ecojustice, and Science Education: Rethinking an
Education from Nowhere\", by Mueller and Tippins (2011), acknowledges in
the abstract that: \"There is an emerging emphasis in science education
on engaging youth in citizen science.\" The authors also ask: \"whether
citizen science goes further with respect to citizen development.\" The
abstract ends by stating that the \"chapter takes account of the ways
educators will collaborate with members of the community to effectively
guide decisions, which offers promise for sharing a responsibility for
democratizing science with others.\"From the journal Democracy and
Education, an article entitled: \"Lessons Learned from Citizen Science
in the Classroom\" by authors Gray, Nicosia and Jordan (GNJ) (2012)
gives a response to a study by Mueller, Tippins and Bryan (MTB) called
\"The Future of Citizen Science\". GNJ begins by stating in the abstract
that \"The Future of Citizen Science\": \"provides an important
theoretical perspective about the future of democratized science and K12
education.\" But GRB state: \"However, the authors (MTB) fail to
adequately address the existing barriers and constraints to moving
community-based science into the classroom.\" They end the abstract by
arguing: \"that the resource constraints of scientists, teachers, and
students likely pose problems to moving true democratized science into
the classroom.\"In 2014, a study was published called \"Citizen Science
and Lifelong Learning\" by R. Edwards in the journal Studies in the
Education of Adults. Edwards begins by writing in the abstract that
citizen science projects have expanded over recent years and engaged
citizen scientists and professionals in diverse ways. He continues:
\"Yet there has been little educational exploration of such projects to
date.\" He describes that \"there has been limited exploration of the
educational backgrounds of adult contributors to citizen science\".
Edwards explains that citizen science contributors are referred to as
volunteers, citizens or as amateurs. He ends the abstract: \"The article
will explore the nature and significance of these different
characterisations and also suggest possibilities for further
research.\"In the journal Microbiology and Biology Education a study was
published by Shah and Martinez (2015) called \"Current Approaches in
Implementing Citizen Science in the Classroom\". They begin by writing
in the abstract that citizen science is a partnership between
inexperienced amateurs and trained scientists. The authors continue:
\"With recent studies showing a weakening in scientific competency of
American students, incorporating citizen science initiatives in the
curriculum provides a means to address deficiencies\". They argue that
combining traditional and innovative methods can help provide a
practical experience of science. The abstract ends: \"Citizen science
can be used to emphasize the recognition and use of systematic
approaches to solve problems affecting the community.\"In November 2017,
authors Mitchell, Triska and Liberatore published a study in PLOS ONE
titled \"Benefits and Challenges of Incorporating Citizen Science into
University Education\". The authors begin by stating in the abstract
that citizen scientists contribute data with the expectation that it
will be used. It reports that citizen science has been used for first
year university students as a means to experience research. They
continue: \"Surveys of more than 1500 students showed that their
environmental engagement increased significantly after participating in
data collection and data analysis.\" However, only a third of students
agreed that data collected by citizen scientists was reliable. A
positive outcome of this was that the students were more careful of
their own research. The abstract ends: \"If true for citizen scientists
in general, enabling participants as well as scientists to analyse data
could enhance data quality, and so address a key constraint of
broad-scale citizen science programs.\"Citizen science has also been
described as challenging the \"traditional hierarchies and structures of
knowledge creation\".: 122 History While citizen science developed at
the end of the 20th century, characteristics of citizen science are not
new. Prior to the 20th century, science was often the pursuit of
gentleman scientists, amateur or self-funded researchers such as Sir
Isaac Newton, Benjamin Franklin, and Charles Darwin. Women citizen
scientists from before the 20th century include Florence Nightingale who
\"perhaps better embodies the radical spirit of citizen science\".
Before the professionalization of science by the end of the 19th
century, most pursued scientific projects as an activity rather than a
profession itself, an example being amateur naturalists in the 18th and
19th centuries.During the British colonization of North America,
American Colonists recorded the weather, offering much of the
information now used to estimate climate data and climate change during
this time period. These people included John Campanius Holm, who
recorded storms in the mid-1600s, as well as George Washington, Thomas
Jefferson, and Benjamin Franklin who tracked weather patterns during
America\'s founding. Their work focused on identifying patterns by
amassing their data and that of their peers and predecessors, rather
than specific professional knowledge in scientific fields. Some consider
these individuals to be the first citizen scientists, some consider
figures such as Leonardo da Vinci and Charles Darwin to be citizen
scientists, while others feel that citizen science is a distinct
movement that developed later on, building on the preceding history of
science.By the mid-20th century, however, science was dominated by
researchers employed by universities and government research
laboratories. By the 1970s, this transformation was being called into
question. Philosopher Paul Feyerabend called for a \"democratization of
science\". Biochemist Erwin Chargaff advocated a return to science by
nature-loving amateurs in the tradition of Descartes, Newton, Leibniz,
Buffon, and Darwin---science dominated by \"amateurship instead of
money-biased technical bureaucrats\".A study from 2016 indicates that
the largest impact of citizen science is in research on biology,
conservation and ecology, and is utilized mainly as a methodology of
collecting and classifying data. Amateur astronomy Astronomy has long
been a field where amateurs have contributed throughout time, all the
way up to the present day.Collectively, amateur astronomers observe a
variety of celestial objects and phenomena sometimes with equipment that
they build themselves. Common targets of amateur astronomers include the
Moon, planets, stars, comets, meteor showers, and a variety of deep-sky
objects such as star clusters, galaxies, and nebulae. Observations of
comets and stars are also used to measure the local level of artificial
skyglow. One branch of amateur astronomy, amateur astrophotography,
involves the taking of photos of the night sky. Many amateurs like to
specialize in the observation of particular objects, types of objects,
or types of events that interest them.The American Association of
Variable Star Observers has gathered data on variable stars for
educational and professional analysis since 1911 and promotes
participation beyond its membership on its Citizen Sky website.Project
PoSSUM is a relatively new organization, started in March 2012, which
trains citizen scientists of many ages to go on polar suborbital
missions. On these missions, they study noctilucent clouds with remote
sensing, which reveals interesting clues about changes in the upper
atmosphere and the ozone due to climate change. This is a form of
citizen science which trains younger generations to be ambitious,
participating in intriguing astronomy and climate change science
projects even without a professional degree. Butterfly counts Butterfly
counts have a long tradition of involving individuals in the study of
butterflies\' range and their relative abundance. Two long-running
programs are the UK Butterfly Monitoring Scheme (started in 1976) and
the North American Butterfly Association\'s Butterfly Count Program
(started in 1975). There are various protocols for monitoring
butterflies and different organizations support one or more of
transects, counts and/or opportunistic sightings. eButterfly is an
example of a program designed to capture any of the three types of
counts for observers in North America. Species-specific programs also
exist, with monarchs the prominent example. Two examples of this involve
the counting of monarch butterflies during the fall migration to
overwintering sites in Mexico: (1) Monarch Watch is a continent-wide
project, while (2) the Cape May Monarch Monitoring Project is an example
of a local project. The Austrian project Viel-Falter investigated if and
how trained and supervised pupils are able to systematically collect
data about the occurrence of diurnal butterflies, and how this data
could contribute to a permanent butterfly monitoring system. Despite
substantial identification uncertainties for some species or species
groups, the data collected by pupils was successfully used to predict
the general habitat quality for butterflies. Ornithology Citizen science
projects have become increasingly focused on providing benefits to
scientific research. The North American Bird Phenology Program
(historically called the Bird Migration and Distribution records) may
have been the earliest collective effort of citizens collecting
ornithological information in the U.S. The program, dating back to 1883,
was started by Wells Woodbridge Cooke. Cooke established a network of
observers around North America to collect bird migration records. The
Audubon Society\'s Christmas Bird Count, which began in 1900, is another
example of a long-standing tradition of citizen science which has
persisted to the present day, now containing a collection of six million
handwritten migration observer cards that date back to the 19th century.
Participants input this data into an online database for analysis.
Citizen scientists help gather data that will be analyzed by
professional researchers, and can be used to produce bird population and
biodiversity indicators. Raptor migration research relies on the data
collected by the hawkwatching community. This mostly volunteer group
counts migrating accipiters, buteos, falcons, harriers, kites, eagles,
osprey, vultures and other raptors at hawk sites throughout North
America during the spring and fall seasons. The daily data is uploaded
to hawkcount.org where it can be viewed by professional scientists and
the public. Such indices can be useful tools to inform management,
resource allocation, policy and planning. For example, European breeding
bird survey data provide input for the Farmland Bird Index, adopted by
the European Union as a structural indicator of sustainable development.
This provides a cost-effective alternative to government monitoring.
Similarly, data collected by citizen scientists as part of BirdLife
Australia\'s has been analysed to produce the first-ever Australian
Terrestrial Bird Indices.Most recently, more programs have sprung up
worldwide, including NestWatch, a bird species monitoring program which
tracks data on reproduction. This might include studies on when and how
often nesting occurs, counting eggs laid and how many hatch
successfully, and what proportion of hatchlings survive infancy.
Participation in this program is extremely easy for the general public
to join. Using the recently created nest watch app which is available on
almost all devices, anyone can begin to observe their local species,
recording results every 3 to 4 days within the app. This forms a
continually-growing database which researchers can view and utilize to
understand trends within specific bird populations. Citizen oceanography
The concept of citizen science has been extended to the ocean
environment for characterizing ocean dynamics and tracking marine
debris. For example, the mobile app Marine Debris Tracker is a joint
partnership of National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and the
University of Georgia. Long term sampling efforts such as the continuous
plankton recorder has been fitted on ships of opportunity since 1931.
Plankton collection by sailors and subsequent genetic analysis was
pioneered in 2013 by Indigo V Expeditions as a way to better understand
marine microbial structure and function. Coral reefs Citizen science in
coral reef studies developed in the 21st century. Underwater photography
has become more popular since the development of moderate priced digital
cameras with waterproof housings in the early 2000s, resulting on
millions of pictures posted every year on various websites and social
media. This mass of documentation has great scientific potential, as
millions of tourists possess a much superior coverage power than
professional scientists, who cannot spend so much time in the field. As
a consequence, several participative sciences programs have been
developed, supported by geotagging and identification web sites such as
iNaturalist. The Monitoring through many eyes project collates thousands
of underwater images of the Great Barrier Reef and provides an interface
for elicitation of reef health indicators.The National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) also offers opportunities for
volunteer participation. By taking measurements in The United States\'
National Marine Sanctuaries, citizens contribute data to marine biology
projects. In 2016, NOAA benefited from 137,000 hours of research.There
also exist protocols for auto-organization and self-teaching aimed at
biodiversity-interested snorkelers, in order for them to turn their
observations into sound scientific data, available for research. This
kind of approach has been successfully used in Réunion island, allowing
for tens of new records and even new species. Freshwater fish Aquarium
hobbyists and their respective organizations are very passionate about
fish conservation and often more knowledgeable about specific fish
species and groups than scientific researchers. They have played an
important role in the conservation of freshwater fishes by discovering
new species, maintaining extensive databases with ecological information
on thousands of species (such as for catfish, Mexican freshwater fishes,
killifishes, cichlids), and successfully keeping and providing
endangered and extinct-in-the-wild species for conservation projects.
The CARES (Conservation, Awareness, Recognition, Encouragement, and
Support) preservation program is the largest hobbyist organization
containing over 30 aquarium societies and international organizations,
and encourages serious aquarium hobbyists to devote tank space to the
most threatened or extinct-in-the-wild species to ensure their survival
for future generations. Amphibians Citizen scientists also work to
monitor and conserve amphibian populations. One recent project is
FrogWatch USA, organized by the Association of Zoos and Aquariums.
Participants are invited to educate themselves on their local wetlands
and help to save amphibian populations by reporting the data on the
calls of local frogs and toads. The project already has over 150,000
observations from more than 5000 contributors. Participants are trained
by program coordinators to identify calls and utilize this training to
report data they find between February and August of each \"monitoring
season\". Data is used to monitor diversity, invasion, and long-term
shifts in population health within these frog and toad communities.
Rocky reefs Reef Life Survey is a marine life monitoring programme based
in Hobart, Tasmania. The project uses recreational divers that have been
trained to make fish and invertebrate counts, using an approximate 50m
constant depth transect of tropical and temperate reefs, which might
include coral reefs. Reef Life Survey is international in its scope, but
the data collectors are predominantly from Australia. The database is
available to marine ecology researchers, and is used by several marine
protected area managements in Australia, New Zealand, American Samoa and
the eastern Pacific. Its results have also been included in the
Australian Ocean DATA Network. Agriculture Farmer participation in
experiments has a long tradition in agricultural science. There are many
opportunities for citizen engagement in different parts of food systems.
Citizen science is actively used for crop variety selection for climate
adaptation, involving thousands of farmers. Art history Citizen science
has a long tradition in natural science. Today, citizen science projects
can also be found in various fields of science like art history. For
example, the Zooniverse project AnnoTate is a transcription tool
developed to enable volunteers to read and transcribe the personal
papers of British-born and émigré artists. The papers are drawn from the
Tate Archive. Another example of citizen science in art history is
ARTigo. ARTigo collects semantic data on artworks from the footprints
left by players of games featuring artwork images. From these
footprints, ARTigo automatically builds a semantic search engine for
artworks. Biodiversity Citizen science has made significant
contributions to the analysis of biodiversity across the world. A
majority of data collected has been focused primarily on species
occurrence, abundance and phenology with birds being primarily the most
popular group observed There is growing efforts to expand the use of
citizen science across other fields. Past data on biodiversity has had
limitations in the quantity of data to make any meaningful broad
connections to losses in biodiversity. Recruiting citizens already out
in the field opens a tremendous amount of new data. For example,
thousands of farmers reporting the changes in biodiversity in their
farms over many years has provided a large amount of relevant data
concerning the effect of different farming methods on biodiversity.
Another example, is WomSAT, a citizen science project that collects data
on wombat roadkill and sarcoptic mange incidence and distribution, to
support conservation efforts for the species. Citizen science can be
used to great effect in addition to the usual scientific methods in
biodiversity monitoring. The typical active method of species detection
is able to collect data on the broad biodiversity of areas while citizen
science approaches has shown to be more effective at identifying
invasive species. In combination, this provides an effective strategy of
monitoring the changes in biodiversity of ecosystems. Health and welfare
In the research fields of health and welfare, citizen science is often
discussed in other terms, such as \"public involvement\", \"user
engagement\", or \"community member involvement\". However the meaning
is similar to citizen science, with the exception that citizens are not
often involved in collecting data but more often involved in
prioritisation of research ideas and improving methodology, e.g. survey
questions. In the last decades, researchers and funders have gained
awareness of the benefits from involving citizens in the research work,
but the involvement of citizens in a meaningful way is not a common
practice. There is an ongoing discussion on how to evaluate citizen
science in health and welfare research.One aspect to consider in citizen
science in health and welfare, that stands out compared to in other
academic fields, is who to involve. When research concerns human
experiences, representation of a group becomes important. While it is
commonly acknowledged that the people involved need to have lived
experience of the concerned topic, representation is still an issue, and
researchers are debating whether this is a useful concept in citizen
science. Modern technology Newer technologies have increased the options
for citizen science. Citizen scientists can build and operate their own
instruments to gather data for their own experiments or as part of a
larger project. Examples include amateur radio, amateur astronomy, Six
Sigma Projects, and Maker activities. Scientist Joshua Pearce has
advocated for the creation of open-source hardware based scientific
equipment that both citizen scientists and professional scientists,
which can be replicated by digital manufacturing techniques such as 3D
printing. Multiple studies have shown this approach radically reduces
scientific equipment costs. Examples of this approach include water
testing, nitrate and other environmental testing, basic biology and
optics. Groups such as Public Lab, which is a community where citizen
scientists can learn how to investigate environmental concerns using
inexpensive DIY techniques, embody this approach. Video technology is
much used in scientific research. The Citizen Science Center in the
Nature Research Center wing of the North Carolina Museum of Natural
Sciences has exhibits on how to get involved in scientific research and
become a citizen scientist. For example, visitors can observe
birdfeeders at the Prairie Ridge Ecostation satellite facility via live
video feed and record which species they see. Since 2005, the
Genographic Project has used the latest genetic technology to expand our
knowledge of the human story, and its pioneering use of DNA testing to
engage and involve the public in the research effort has helped to
create a new breed of \"citizen scientist\". Geno 2.0 expands the scope
for citizen science, harnessing the power of the crowd to discover new
details of human population history. This includes supporting,
organization and dissemination of personal DNA (genetic) testing. Like
amateur astronomy, citizen scientists encouraged by volunteer
organizations like the International Society of Genetic Genealogy have
provided valuable information and research to the professional
scientific community.With unmanned aerial vehicles, further citizen
science is enabled. One example is the ESA\'s AstroDrone smartphone app
for gathering robotic data with the Parrot AR.Drone.Citizens in Space
(CIS), a project of the United States Rocket Academy, seeks to combine
citizen science with citizen space exploration. CIS is training citizen
astronauts to fly as payload operators on suborbital reusable spacecraft
that are now in development. CIS will also be developing, and
encouraging others to develop, citizen-science payloads to fly on
suborbital vehicles. CIS has already acquired a contract for 10 flights
on the Lynx suborbital vehicle, being developed by XCOR Aerospace, and
plans to acquire additional flights on XCOR Lynx and other suborbital
vehicles in the future.CIS believes that \"The development of low-cost
reusable suborbital spacecraft will be the next great enabler, allowing
citizens to participate in space exploration and space science.\"The
website CitizenScience.gov was started by the U.S. government to
\"accelerate the use of crowdsourcing and citizen science\" in the
United States. Following the internet\'s rapid increase of citizen
science projects, this site is one of the most prominent resource banks
for citizen scientists and government supporters alike. It features
three sections: a catalog of existing citizen science projects which are
federally supported, a toolkit to help federal officials as they develop
and maintain their future projects, and several other resources and
projects. This was created as the result of a mandate within the
Crowdsourcing and Citizen Science Act of 2016 (15 USC 3724). Internet
The Internet has been a boon to citizen science, particularly through
gamification. One of the first Internet-based citizen science
experiments was NASA\'s Clickworkers, which enabled the general public
to assist in the classification of images, greatly reducing the time to
analyze large data sets. Another was the Citizen Science Toolbox,
launched in 2003, of the Australian Coastal Collaborative Research
Centre. Mozak is a game in which players create 3D reconstructions from
images of actual human and mouse neurons, helping to advance
understanding of the brain. One of the largest citizen science games is
Eyewire, a brain-mapping puzzle game developed at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology that now has over 200,000 players. Another
example is Quantum Moves, a game developed by the Center for Driven
Community Research at Aarhus University, which uses online community
efforts to solve quantum physics problems. The solutions found by
players can then be used in the lab to feed computational algorithms
used in building a scalable quantum computer. More generally, Amazon\'s
Mechanical Turk is frequently used in the creation, collection, and
processing of data by paid citizens. There is controversy as to whether
or not the data collected through such services is reliable, as it is
subject to participants\' desire for compensation. However, use of
Mechanical Turk tends to quickly produce more diverse participant
backgrounds, as well as comparably accurate data when compared to
traditional collection methods.The internet has also enabled citizen
scientists to gather data to be analyzed by professional researchers.
Citizen science networks are often involved in the observation of cyclic
events of nature (phenology), such as effects of global warming on plant
and animal life in different geographic areas, and in monitoring
programs for natural-resource management. On BugGuide.Net, an online
community of naturalists who share observations of arthropod, amateurs
and professional researchers contribute to the analysis. By October
2022, BugGuide has over 1,886,513 images submitted by 47,732
contributors. Not counting iNaturalist and eBird, the Zooniverse is home
to the internet\'s largest, most popular and most successful citizen
science projects. The Zooniverse and the suite of projects it contains
is produced, maintained and developed by the Citizen Science Alliance
(CSA). The member institutions of the CSA work with many academic and
other partners around the world to produce projects that use the efforts
and ability of volunteers to help scientists and researchers deal with
the flood of data that confronts them. On 29 June 2015, the Zooniverse
released a new software version with a project-building tool allowing
any registered user to create a project. Project owners may optionally
complete an approval process to have their projects listed on the
Zooniverse site and promoted to the Zooniverse community. A NASA/JPL
picture to the right gives an example from one of Zooniverse\'s projects
The Milky Way Project. The website CosmoQuest has as its goal \"To
create a community of people bent on together advancing our
understanding of the universe; a community of people who are
participating in doing science, who can explain why what they do
matters, and what questions they are helping to answer.\"CrowdCrafting
enables its participants to create and run projects where volunteers
help with image classification, transcription, geocoding and more. The
platform is powered by PyBossa software, a free and open-source
framework for crowdsourcing.Project Soothe is a citizen science research
project based at the University of Edinburgh. The aim of this research
is to create a bank of soothing images, submitted by members of the
public, which can be used to help others through psychotherapy and
research in the future. Since 2015, Project Soothe has received over 600
soothing photographs from people in 23 countries. Anyone aged 12 years
or over is eligible to participate in this research in two ways: (1) By
submitting soothing photos that they have taken with a description of
why the images make them feel soothed (2) By rating the photos that have
been submitted by people worldwide for their soothability. The internet
has allowed for many individuals to share and upload massive amounts of
data. Using the internet citizen observatories have been designed as a
platform to both increase citizen participation and knowledge of their
surrounding environment by collecting whatever relevant data is focused
by the program. The idea is making it easier and more exciting for
citizens to get and stay involved in local data collection. The
invention of social media has aided in providing massive amounts of
information from the public to create citizen science programs. In a
case study by Andrea Liberatore, Erin Bowkett, Catriona J. MacLeod, Eric
Spurr, and Nancy Longnecker, the New Zealand Garden Bird Survey is
conducted as one such project with the aid of social media. It examines
the influence of utilizing a Facebook group to collect data from citizen
scientists as the researchers work on the project over the span of a
year. The authors claim that this use of social media greatly helps with
the efficiency of this study and makes the atmosphere feel more
communal. Smartphone The bandwidth and ubiquity afforded by smartphones
has vastly expanded the opportunities for citizen science. Examples
include iNaturalist, the San Francisco project, the WildLab, Project
Noah, and Aurorasurus. Due to their ubiquity, for example, Twitter,
Facebook, and smartphones have been useful for citizen scientists,
having enabled them to discover and propagate a new type of aurora
dubbed \"STEVE\" in 2016.There are also apps for monitoring birds,
marine wildlife and other organisms, and the \"Loss of the Night\".An
Android app Sapelli is a mobile data-collection and -sharing platform
designed with a particular focus on non-literate and illiterate users.
The SPOTTERON app creates synergy effects for projects by sharing a
common feature set.\"The Crowd and the Cloud\" is a four-part series
broadcast during April 2017, which examines citizen science. It shows
how smartphones, computers and mobile technology enable regular citizens
to become part of a 21st-century way of doing science. The programs also
demonstrate how citizen scientists help professional scientists to
advance knowledge, which helps speed up new discoveries and innovations.
The Crowd & The Cloud is based upon work supported by the National
Science Foundation. Seismology Since 1975, in order to improve
earthquake detection and collect useful information, the
European-Mediterranean Seismological Centre monitors the visits of
earthquake eyewitnesses to its website and relies on Facebook and
Twitter. More recently, they developed the LastQuake mobile application
which notifies users about earthquakes occurring around the world,
alerts people when earthquakes hit near them, gathers earthquake
eyewitnesses\' testimonies to estimate the felt ground shaking and
possible damages. Hydrology Citizen science has been used to provide
valuable data in hydrology (catchment science), notably flood risk,
water quality, and water resource management. A growth in internet use
and smartphone ownership has allowed users to collect and share
real-time flood-risk information using, for example, social media and
web-based forms. Although traditional data collection methods are
well-established, citizen science is being used to fill the data gaps on
a local level, and is therefore meaningful to individual communities.
Data collected from citizen science can also compare well to
professionally-collected data. It has been demonstrated that citizen
science is particularly advantageous during a flash flood because the
public are more likely to witness these rarer hydrological events than
scientists. Plastics and pollution Citizen science includes projects
that help monitor plastics and their associated pollution. These include
The Ocean Cleanup, #OneLess, The Big Microplastic Survey, EXXpedition
and Alliance to End Plastic Waste. Ellipsis seeks to map the
distribution of litter using aerial data mapping by unmanned aerial
vehicles and machine learning software. A Zooniverse project called The
Plastic Tide (now finished) helped train an algorithm used by
Ellipsis.Examples of relevant articles (by date): Citizen Science
Promotes Environmental Engagement: (quote) \"Citizen science projects
are rapidly gaining popularity among the public, in which volunteers
help gather data on species that can be used by scientists in research.
And it\'s not just adults who are involved in these projects -- even
kids have collected high-quality data in the US.\" Tackling
Microplastics on Our Own: (quote) \"Plastics, ranging from the circles
of soda can rings to microbeads the size of pinheads, are starting to
replace images of sewage for a leading cause of pollution -- especially
in the ocean\". Further, \"With recent backing from the Crowdsourcing
and Citizen Science Act, citizen science is increasingly embraced as a
tool by US Federal agencies.\" Citizen Scientists Are Tracking Plastic
Pollution Worldwide: (quote) \"Scientists who are monitoring the spread
of tiny pieces of plastic throughout the environment are getting help
from a small army of citizen volunteers -- and they\'re finding bits of
polymer in some of the most remote parts of North America.\" Artificial
intelligence and citizen scientists: Powering the clean-up of Asia
Pacific\'s beaches:(quote) \"The main objective is to support citizen
scientists cleaning up New Zealand beaches and get a better
understanding of why litter is turning up, so preventive and proactive
action can be taken.\" Citizen science could help address Canada\'s
plastic pollution problem: (quote) \"But citizen engagement and
participation in science goes beyond beach cleanups, and can be used as
a tool to bridge gaps between communities and scientists. These
partnerships between scientists and citizen scientists have produced
real world data that have influenced policy changes.\"Examples of
relevant scientific studies or books include (by date): Distribution and
abundance of small plastic debris on beaches in the SE Pacific (Chile):
a study supported by a citizen science project: (quote) \"The citizen
science project \"National Sampling of Small Plastic Debris\" was
supported by schoolchildren from all over Chile who documented the
distribution and abundance of small plastic debris on Chilean beaches.
Thirty-nine schools and nearly 1000 students from continental Chile and
Easter Island participated in the activity.\" Incorporating citizen
science to study plastics in the environment: (quote) \"Taking advantage
of public interest in the impact of plastic on the marine environment,
successful Citizen Science (CS) programs incorporate members of the
public to provide repeated sampling for time series as well as synoptic
collections over wide geographic regions.\" Marine anthropogenic litter
on British beaches: A 10-year nationwide assessment using citizen
science data: (quote) \"Citizen science projects, whereby members of the
public gather information, offer a low-cost method of collecting large
volumes of data with considerable temporal and spatial coverage.
Furthermore, such projects raise awareness of environmental issues and
can lead to positive changes in behaviours and attitudes.\" Determining
Global Distribution of Microplastics by Combining Citizen Science and
In-Depth Case Studies: (quote) \"Our first project involves the general
public through citizen science. Participants collect sand samples from
beaches using a basic protocol, and we subsequently extract and quantify
microplastics in a central laboratory using the standard operating
procedure.\" Risk Perception of Plastic Pollution: Importance of
Stakeholder Involvement and Citizen Science: (quote) \"The chapter
finally discusses how risk perception can be improved by greater
stakeholder involvement and utilization of citizen science and thereby
improve the foundation for timely and efficient societal measures.\"
Assessing the citizen science approach as tool to increase awareness on
the marine litter problem: (quote) \"This paper provides a quantitative
assessment of students\' attitude and behaviors towards marine litter
before and after their participation to SEACleaner, an educational and
citizen science project devoted to monitor macro- and micro-litter in an
Area belonging to Pelagos Sanctuary.\" Spatial trends and drivers of
marine debris accumulation on shorelines in South Eleuthera, The Bahamas
using citizen science: (quote) \"This study measured spatial
distribution of marine debris stranded on beaches in South Eleuthera,
The Bahamas. Citizen science, fetch modeling, relative exposure index
and predictive mapping were used to determine marine debris source and
abundance.\" Making citizen science count: Best practices and challenges
of citizen science projects on plastics in aquatic environments: (quote)
\"Citizen science is a cost-effective way to gather data over a large
geographical range while simultaneously raising public awareness on the
problem\". White and wonderful? Microplastics prevail in snow from the
Alps to the Arctic: (quote) \"In March 2018, five samples were taken at
different locations on Svalbard (Fig. 1A and Table 1) by citizen
scientists embarking on a land expedition by ski-doo (Aemalire project).
The citizens were instructed on contamination prevention and equipped
with protocol forms, prerinsed 2-liter stainless steel containers
(Ecotanca), a porcelain mug, a steel spoon, and a soup ladle for
sampling.\" Citizen sensing Citizen sensing can be a form of citizen
science: (quote) \"The work of citizen sensing, as a form of citizen
science, then further transforms Stengers\'s notion of the work of
science by moving the experimental facts and collectives where
scientific work is undertaken out of the laboratory of experts and into
the world of citizens.\" Similar sensing activities include Crowdsensing
and participatory monitoring. While the idea of using mobile technology
to aid this sensing is not new, creating devices and systems that can be
used to aid regulation has not been straightforward. Some examples of
projects that include citizen sensing are: Citizen Sense (2013-2018):
(quote) \"Practices of monitoring and sensing environments have migrated
to everyday participatory applications, where users of smart phones and
networked devices are able to engage with modes of environmental
observation and data collection.\" Breathe Project: (quote) \"We use the
best available science and technology to better understand the quality
of the air we breathe and provide opportunities for citizens to engage
and take action.\" The Bristol Approach to Citizen Sensing: (quote)
\"Citizen Sensing is about empowering people and places to understand
and use smart tech and data from sensors to tackle the issues they care
about, connect with other people who can help, and take positive,
practical action.\" Luftdaten.info: (quote) \"You and thousands of
others around the world install self-built sensors on the outside their
home. Luftdaten.info generates a continuously updated particular matter
map from the transmitted data.\" CitiSense: (quote) \"CitiSense aims to
co-develop a participatory risk management system (PRMS) with citizens,
local authorities and organizations which enables them to contribute to
advanced climate services and enhanced urban climate resilience as well
as receive recommendations that support their security.\"A group of
citizen scientists in a community-led project targeting toxic smoke from
wood burners in Bristol, has recorded 11 breaches of World Health
Organization daily guidelines for ultra-fine particulate pollution over
a period of six months.In a £7m programme funded by water regulator
Ofwat, citizen scientists are being trained to test for pollution and
over-abstraction in 10 river catchment areas in the UK. Sensors will be
used and the information gathered will be available in a central
visualisation platform. The project is led by The Rivers Trust and
United Utilities and includes volunteers such as anglers testing the
rivers they use. The Angling Trust provides the pollution sensors, with
Kristian Kent from the Trust saying: \"Citizen science is a reality of
the world in the future, so they're not going to be able to just sweep
it under the carpet.\" COVID-19 pandemic Resources for computer science
and scientific crowdsourcing projects concerning COVID-19 can be found
on the internet or as apps. Some such projects are listed below: The
distributed computing project Folding@home launched a program to assist
researchers around the world who are working on finding a cure and
learning more about the coronavirus pandemic. The initial wave of
projects are meant to simulate potentially druggable protein targets
from SARS-CoV-2, and the related SARS-CoV virus, about which there is
significantly more data available. Distributed computing project
Rosetta@home also joined the effort in March. The project uses computers
of volunteers to model SARS-CoV-2 virus proteins to discover possible
drug targets or create new proteins to neutralize the virus. Researchers
revealed that with the help of Rosetta@home, they had been able to
\"accurately predict the atomic-scale structure of an important
coronavirus protein weeks before it could be measured in the lab.\" The
OpenPandemics - COVID-19 project is a partnership between Scripps
Research and IBM\'s World Community Grid for a distributed computing
project that \"will automatically run a simulated experiment in the
background \[of connected home PCs\] which will help predict the
effectiveness of a particular chemical compound as a possible treatment
for COVID-19\". The Eterna OpenVaccine project enables video game
players to \"design an mRNA encoding a potential vaccine against the
novel coronavirus.\" The EU-Citizen.Science project has \"a selection of
resources related to the current COVID19 pandemic. It contains links to
citizen science and crowdsourcing projects\" The COVID-19 Citizen
Science project is \"a new initiative by University of California, San
Francisco physician-scientists\" that \"will allow anyone in the world
age 18 or over to become a citizen scientist advancing understanding of
the disease.\" The CoronaReport digital journalism project is \"a
citizen science project which democratizes the reporting on the
Coronavirus, and makes these reports accessible to other citizens.\" The
COVID Symptom Tracker is a crowdsourced study of the symptoms of the
virus. It has had two million downloads by April 2020. The Covid Near
You epidemiology tool \"uses crowdsourced data to visualize maps to help
citizens and public health agencies identify current and potential
hotspots for the recent pandemic coronavirus, COVID-19.\" The We-Care
project is a novel initiative by University of California, Davis
researchers that uses anonymity and crowdsourced information to alert
infected users and slow the spread of COVID-19. COVID RADAR was an app
in the Netherlands, active between April 2020 and February 2022, with
which users anonymously answered a short daily questionnaire asking
about their symptoms, behavior, coronavirus test results, and
vaccination status. Symptoms and behavior were visualized on a map and
users received feedback on their individual risk and behaviors relative
to the national mean. The app had over 250,000 users, who filled out the
questionnaire over 8.5 million times.For coronavirus studies and
information that can help enable citizen science, many online resources
are available through open access and open science websites, including
an intensive care medicine e-book chapter hosted by EMCrit and portals
run by the Cambridge University Press, the Europe branch of the
Scholarly Publishing and Academic Resources Coalition, The Lancet, John
Wiley and Sons, and Springer Nature. Around the world Africa In South
Africa (SA), citizen science projects include: the Stream Assessment
Scoring System (miniSASS) which \"encourages enhanced catchment
management for water security in a climate stressed society.\" The South
African National Biodiversity Institute is partnered with iNaturalist as
a platform for biodiversity observations using digital photography and
geolocation technology to monitor biodiversity. Such partnerships can
reduce duplication of effort, help standardise procedures and make the
data more accessible. Also in SA, \"Members of the public, or \'citizen
scientists\' are helping researchers from the University of Pretoria to
identify Phytophthora species present in the fynbos.\" In June 2016,
citizen science experts from across East Africa gathered in Nairobi,
Kenya, for a symposium organised by the Tropical Biology Association
(TBA) in partnership with the Centre for Ecology & Hydrology (CEH). The
aim was \"to harness the growing interest and expertise in East Africa
to stimulate new ideas and collaborations in citizen science.\" Rosie
Trevelyan of the TBA said: \"We need to enhance our knowledge about the
status of Africa\'s species and the threats facing them. And scientists
can\'t do it all on their own. At the same time, citizen science is an
extremely effective way of connecting people more closely to nature and
enrolling more people in conservation action\". The website Zooniverse
hosts several African citizen science projects, including: Snapshot
Serengeti, Wildcam Gorongosa and Jungle Rhythms. Nigeria has the Ibadan
Bird Club whose to aim is to \"exchange ideas and share knowledge about
birds, and get actively involved in the conservation of birds and
biodiversity.\" In Namibia, Giraffe Spotter.org is \"project that will
provide people with an online citizen science platform for giraffes\".
Within the Republic of the Congo, the territories of an indigenous
people have been mapped so that \"the Mbendjele tribe can protect
treasured trees from being cut down by logging companies\". An Android
open-source app called Sapelli was used by the Mbendjele which helped
them map \"their tribal lands and highlighted trees that were important
to them, usually for medicinal reasons or religious significance.
Congolaise Industrielle des Bois then verified the trees that the tribe
documented as valuable and removed them from its cutting schedule. The
tribe also documented illegal logging and poaching activities.\" In West
Africa, the eradication of the recent outbreak of Ebola virus disease
was partly helped by citizen science. \"Communities learnt how to assess
the risks posed by the disease independently of prior cultural
assumptions, and local empiricism allowed cultural rules to be reviewed,
suspended or changed as epidemiological facts emerged.\" \"Citizen
science is alive and well in all three Ebola-affected countries. And if
only a fraction of the international aid directed at rebuilding health
systems were to be redirected towards support for citizen science, that
might be a fitting memorial to those who died in the epidemic.\" Asia
The Hong Kong Birdwatching Society was established in 1957, and is the
only local civil society aiming at appreciating and conserving Hong Kong
birds and their natural environment. Their bird surveys go back to 1958,
and they carry out a number of Citizen Science events such as their
yearly sparrow census. The Bird Count India partnership consists of a
large number of organizations and groups involved in birdwatching and
bird surveys. They coordinate a number of Citizen Science projects such
as the Kerala Bird Atlas and Mysore city Bird Atlas that map the
distribution and abundance of birds of entire Indian states. RAD@home
Astronomy Collaboratory is an Indian citizen science research platform
in astronomy. The collaboratory primarily focuses on making discoveries
from the new and sensitive TIFR GMRT Sky Survey (TGSS) data and follow
them up with the Giant Metrewave Radio Telescope, a SKA pathfinder,
through the ongoing GMRT Time Allocation Committee-approved multi-cycle
project GMRT Observation of Objects Discovered by RAD@home Astronomy
Collaboratory (GOOD-RAC). The Taiwan Roadkill Observation Network,
founded in 2011 and consists of more than 16,000 members as of 2019, is
a Citizen Science project where roadkill across Taiwan is photographed
and sent to the Endemic Species Research Institute for study. Its
primary goal has been to set up an eco-friendly path to mitigate
roadkill challenges and popularize national discourse on environmental
issues and civil participation in scientific research. The members of
the Taiwan Roadkill Observation Network volunteer to observe the
animals\' corpses caused by roadkill or other reasons in Taiwan, and
upload pictures and geographic locations of the roadkill to an internet
database or send the corpses to the Endemic Species Research for making
specimen. Because the members come from different areas of the island,
the collection of data could serve as an animal distribution map of the
island. According to the geographical data and pictures of dead animals
collected by the members, the community itself and the sponsor the
Endemic Species Center could find out the hotspots and the reasons of
animals\' death. One of the most renowned case is that the community
successfully detected rabies cases due to the massively collected data
and the corpse of Melogale moschata have been accumulated for years and
alarmed the government authority to take actions to prevent the
prevalence of rabies in Taiwan immediately. Another case in 2014 that
some citizen scientists discovered birds that died from unknown causes
near an agricultural area, then Taiwan Roadkill Observation Network
cooperated with National Pingtung University of Science and Technology
and engaged citizen scientists to collect bird carcass. The volunteers
collected 250 bird corpses for laboratory tests, which confirmed that
the bird deaths were attributable to the pesticides used on crops. This
prompted the Taiwanese government to restrict pesticides, and the Bill
of Pesticide Management amendment, establishing a pesticide control
system, was passed after the third reading in the Legislative Yuan. The
results indicated that Taiwan Roadkill Observation Network developed a
set of shared working methods and jointly completed certain actions.
Furthermore, the community of Taiwan Roadkill Observation Network have
made real changes on road resign to avoid roadkill, improved the
management of usage of pesticide, epidemic prevention, and so on. The
AirBox Project was launched in Taiwan to create a participatory
ecosystem with a focus on PM2.5 monitoring with AirBox devices. At the
end of 2014, the public paid more attention to the PM2.5 level because
the air pollution problem became worse, especially in central and
southern Taiwan. High PM2.5 level is harmful to our health, such as
respiratory problems, so it aroused public concerns and led to an
intensive debate about air pollution sources. Some experts indicated
that the air quality was affected by pollutants from Mainland China,
while some environmentalists believed that it is the result of
industrialization such as exhaust fumes from local power plants or
factories; however, no one knew the answer because of insufficient data.
Dr. Ling-Jyh Chen, a researcher of the Institute of Information Science,
Academia Sinica, launched The AirBox Project. His original idea is
inspired by a popular Taiwanese slogan Save Your Environment by
Yourself. As an expert in Participatory Sensing System, he decided to
take this bottom-up approach to collect PM2.5 level data, and through
open data and data analysis to have a better understanding of the
possible air pollution source. In this ecosystem, massive data was
collected from the AirBox device. Data was instantly revealed online to
inform people of PM2.5 level so that they take proper action, such as
wearing a mask or staying at home, to prevent themselves from directly
exploring to polluted environment. Data could be also analyzed to
understand the possible sources of pollution and provide recommendations
for improving the situation. To be precise, there are four main steps in
this project. I) Develop the AirBox device. Developing a device that
could correctly collect the data of the PM2.5 level was time-consuming.
It took more than three years to develop AirBox that can be easily used,
but with both high accuracy and low cost. II) Broad installation of
AirBox. In the beginning, very few people were willing to install it at
their homes because of their concerns about the possible harm to their
health, power-consuming problem and maintenances of it, so that AirBoxs
were only installed in a relatively small area. Thanks to the help from
Taiwan\'s LASS (Location Aware Sensing System) community, AirBox
appeared in all parts of Taiwan. As of February 2017, there are more
than 1,600 Air Boxes installed in more than 27 countries. III) Open
Source and Data Analysis. All measurement results were released and
visualized in real-time to the public through different media. Data can
be analyzed to trace pollution sources. Japan has a long history of
citizen science involvement, the 1,200-year-old tradition of collecting
records on cherry blossom flowering probably being the world\'s
longest-running citizen science project. One of the most influential
citizen science projects has also come out of Japan: Safecast. Dedicated
to open citizen science for the environment, Safecast was established in
the wake of the Fukushima nuclear disaster, and produces open hardware
sensors for radiation and air-pollution mapping. Presenting this data
via a global open data network and maps Europe The English naturalist
Charles Darwin (1809--1882) is widely regarded to have been one of the
earliest citizen science contributors in Europe (see History). A century
later, citizen science was experienced by adolescents in Italy during
the 1980s, working on urban energy usages and air pollution.In his book
\"Citizen Science\", Alan Irwin considers the role that scientific
expertise can play in bringing the public and science together and
building a more scientifically active citizenry, empowering individuals
to contribute to scientific development. Since then a citizen science
green paper was published in 2013, and European Commission policy
directives have included citizen science as one of five strategic areas
with funding allocated to support initiatives through the \'Science With
and For Society (SwafS)\', a strand of the Horizon 2020 programme. This
includes significant awards such as the EU Citizen Science Project,
which is creating a hub for knowledge sharing, coordination, and action.
The European Citizen Science Association (ECSA) was set up in 2014 to
encourage the growth of citizen science across Europe, to increase
public participation in scientific processes, mainly by initiating and
supporting citizen science projects as well as conducting research. ECSA
has a membership of over 250 individual and organisational members from
over 30 countries across the European Union and beyond. Examples of
citizen science organisations and associations based in Europe include
the Biosphere Expeditions (Ireland), Bürger schaffen Wissen (Germany),
Citizen Science Lab at Leiden University (Netherlands), Ibercivis (See
External Links), Österreich forscht (Austria). Other organisations can
be found here: EU Citizen Science. Latin America In 2015 the Asháninka
people from Apiwtxa, which crosses the border between Brazil and Peru,
began using the Android app Sapelli to monitor their land. The Ashaninka
have \"faced historical pressures of disease, exploitation and
displacement, and today still face the illegal invasion of their lands
by loggers and hunters. This monitoring project shows how the Apiwtxa
Ashaninka from the Kampa do Rio Amônia Indigenous Territory, Brazil, are
beginning to use smartphones and technological tools to monitor these
illegal activities more effectively.\" In Argentina, two smartphone
Android applications are available for citizen science. i) AppEAR has
been developed at the Institute of Limnology and was launched in May
2016. Joaquín Cochero is a researcher who developed an \"application
that appeals to the collaboration of users of mobile devices in
collecting data that allow the study of aquatic ecosystems\"
(translation). Cochero stated: \"Not much of citizen science in
Argentina, just a few more oriented to astronomy specific cases. As ours
is the first. And I have volunteers from different parts of the country
that are interested in joining together to centralize data. That\'s
great because these types of things require many people participate
actively and voluntarily\" (translation). ii) eBird was launched in
2013, and has so far identified 965 species of birds. eBird in Argentina
is \"developed and managed by the Cornell Lab of Ornithology at Cornell
University, one of the most important ornithological institutions in the
world, and locally presented recently with the support of the Ministry
of Science, Technology and Productive Innovation of the Nation
(MINCyT)\" (translation). Projects in Brazil include: i) Platform and
mobile app \'Missions\' has been developed by IBM in their São Paulo
research lab with Brazil\'s Ministry for Environment and Innovation
(BMEI). Sergio Borger, an IBM team lead in São Paulo, devised the
crowdsourced approach when BMEI approached the company in 2010. They
were looking for a way to create a central repository for the rainforest
data. Users can upload photos of a plant species and its components,
enter its characteristics (such as color and size), compare it against a
catalog photo and classify it. The classification results are juried by
crowdsourced ratings. ii) Exoss Citizen Science is a member of
Astronomers Without Borders and seeks to explore the southern sky for
new meteors and radiants. Users can report meteor fireballs through
uploading pictures on to a webpage or by linking to YouTube. iii) The
Information System on Brazilian Biodiversity (SiBBr) was launched in
2014 \"aiming to encourage and facilitate the publication, integration,
access and use of information about the biodiversity of the country.\"
Their initial goal \"was to gather 2.5 million occurrence records of
species from biological collections in Brazil and abroad up to the end
of 2016. It is now expected that SiBBr will reach nine million records
in 2016.\" Andrea Portela said: \"In 2016, we will begin with the
citizen science. They are tools that enable anyone, without any
technical knowledge, to participate. With this we will achieve greater
engagement with society. People will be able to have more interaction
with the platform, contribute and comment on what Brazil has.\" iv) The
Brazilian Marine Megafauna Project (Iniciativa Pro Mar) is working with
the European CSA towards its main goal, which is the \"sensibilization
of society for marine life issues\" and concerns about pollution and the
over-exploitation of natural resources. Having started as a project
monitoring manta ray, it now extends to whale shark and educating
schools and divers within the Santos area. Its social media activities
include a live streaming of a citizen science course to help divers
identify marine megafauna. v) A smartphone app called Plantix has been
developed by the Leibniz Centre for Agricultural Landscape Research
(ZALF) which helps Brazilian farmers discover crop diseases quicker and
helps fight them more efficiently. Brazil is a very large agricultural
exporter, but between 10 and 30% of crops fail because of disease. \"The
database currently includes 175 frequently occurring crop diseases and
pests as well as 40,000 photos. The identification algorithm of the app
improves with every image which records a success rate of over 90 per
cent as of approximately 500 photos per crop disease.\" vi) In an
Atlantic Ocean forest region in Brazil, an effort to map the genetic
riches of soil is under way. The Drugs From Dirt initiative, based at
the Rockefeller University, seeks to turn up bacteria that yield new
types of antibiotics -- the Brazilian region being particularly rich in
potentially useful bacterial genes. Approximately a quarter of the 185
soil samples have been taken by Citizen Scientists without which the
project could not run. In Chile citizen science projects include (some
websites in Spanish): i) Testing new cancer therapies with scientists
from the Science Foundation for Life. ii) Monitoring the population of
the Chilean bumblebee. iii) Monitoring the invasive ladybird Chinita
arlequín. iv) Collecting rain water data. v) Monitoring various
pollinating fly populations. vi) Providing information and field data on
the abundance and distribution of various species of rockfish. vii)
Investigating the environmental pollution by plastic litter. Projects in
Colombia include (some websites in Spanish): i) The Communications
Project of the Humboldt Institute along with the Organization for
Education and Environmental Protection initiated projects in the Bogotá
wetlands of Cordoba and El Burro, which have a lot of biodiversity. ii)
In the Model Forest of Risaralda, the Colombia \'proyecto de Ciencia
Abierta y Colaborativa\' promotes citizen participation in research
related to how the local environment is adapting to climate change. The
first meeting took place in the Flora and Fauna Sanctuary Otún Quimbaya.
iii) The Citizen Network Environmental Monitoring (CLUSTER), based in
the city of Bucaramanga, seeks to engage younger students in data
science, who are trained in building weather stations with open
repositories based on free software and open hardware data. iv) The
Symposium on Biodiversity has adapted the CS tool iNaturalist for use in
Colombia. v) The Sinchi Amazonic Institute of Scientific Research seeks
to encourage the development and diffusion of knowledge, values and
technologies on the management of natural resources for ethnic groups in
the Amazon. This research should further the use of participatory action
research schemes and promoting participation communities. Since 2010,
the Pacific Biodiversity Institute (PBI) seeks \"volunteers to help
identify, describe and protect wildland complexes and roadless areas in
South America\". The PBI \"are engaged in an ambitious project with our
Latin American conservation partners to map all the wildlands in South
America, to evaluate their contribution to global biodiversity and to
share and disseminate this information.\" In Mexico, a citizen science
project has monitored rainfall data that is linked to a hydrologic
payment for ecosystem services project. Conferences The first Conference
on Public Participation in Scientific Research was held in Portland,
Oregon, in August 2012. Citizen science is now often a theme at large
conferences, such as the annual meeting of the American Geophysical
Union.In 2010, 2012 and 2014 there were three Citizen Cyberscience
summits, organised by the Citizen Cyberscience Centre in Geneva and
University College London. The 2014 summit was hosted in London and
attracted over 300 participants.In November 2015, the ETH Zürich and
University of Zürich hosted an international meeting on the \"Challenges
and Opportunities in Citizen Science\".The first citizen science
conference hosted by the Citizen Science Association was in San Jose,
California, in February 2015 in partnership with the AAAS conference.
The Citizen Science Association conference, CitSci 2017, was held in
Saint Paul, Minnesota, United States, between 17 and 20 May 2017. The
conference had more than 600 attendees. The next CitSci was in March
2019 in Raleigh, North Carolina.The platform \"Österreich forscht\"
hosts the annual Austrian citizen science conference since 2015.
National and regional portals See also References Further reading Web,
Cameron; Williams, Craig; Sousa, Larissa Braz; Doherty, Seamus; Fricker,
Stephen Robert (11 December 2019). \"As heat strikes, here\'s one way to
help fight disease-carrying and nuisance mosquitoes\". The Conversation.
\"The Mozzie Monitors program marks the first time formal mosquito
trapping has been combined with citizen science.\" (Australian project)
Franzoni, Chiara; Sauermann, Henry (February 2014). \"Crowd science: The
organization of scientific research in open collaborative projects\".
Research Policy. 43 (1): 1--20. doi:10.1016/j.respol.2013.07.005. SSRN
2167538. Dick Kasperowsik (interviewed by Ulrich Herb): Citizen Science
as democratization of science? In: telepolis, 2016, 27 August Ridley,
Matt. (8 February 2012) \"Following the Crowd to Citizen Science\". The
Wall Street Journal Young, Jeffrey R. (28 May 2010). \"Crowd Science
Reaches New Heights\", The Chronicle of Higher Education Sauermann,
Henry; Franzoni, Chiara (20 January 2015). \"Crowd science user
contribution patterns and their implications\". Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences. 112 (3): 679--684.
Bibcode:2015PNAS..112..679S. doi:10.1073/pnas.1408907112. PMC 4311847.
PMID 25561529. SSRN 2545945. Bourjon, Philippe; Ducarme, Frédéric; Quod,
Jean-Pascal; Sweet, Michael (2018). \"Involving recreational snorkelers
in inventory improvement or creation: a case study in the Indian
Ocean\". Cahiers de Biologie Marine. 59: 451--460.
doi:10.21411/CBM.A.B05FC714. External links Media related to Citizen
science at Wikimedia Commons \"Controversy over the term \'citizen
science\' CBC News 13 August 2021 accessed 15 April 2023.
