Computational science, also known as scientific computing, technical
computing or scientific computation (SC), is an area of science that
uses advanced computing capabilities to understand and solve complex
physical problems. This includes Algorithms (numerical and
non-numerical): mathematical models, computational models, and computer
simulations developed to solve sciences (e.g, physical, biological, and
social), engineering, and humanities problems Computer hardware that
develops and optimizes the advanced system hardware, firmware,
networking, and data management components needed to solve
computationally demanding problems The computing infrastructure that
supports both the science and engineering problem solving and the
developmental computer and information scienceIn practical use, it is
typically the application of computer simulation and other forms of
computation from numerical analysis and theoretical computer science to
solve problems in various scientific disciplines. The field is different
from theory and laboratory experiments, which are the traditional forms
of science and engineering. The scientific computing approach is to gain
understanding through the analysis of mathematical models implemented on
computers. Scientists and engineers develop computer programs and
application software that model systems being studied and run these
programs with various sets of input parameters. The essence of
computational science is the application of numerical algorithms and
computational mathematics. In some cases, these models require massive
amounts of calculations (usually floating-point) and are often executed
on supercomputers or distributed computing platforms. The computational
scientist The term computational scientist is used to describe someone
skilled in scientific computing. Such a person is usually a scientist,
an engineer, or an applied mathematician who applies high-performance
computing in different ways to advance the state-of-the-art in their
respective applied disciplines in physics, chemistry, or engineering.
Computational science is now commonly considered a third mode of
science, complementing and adding to experimentation/observation and
theory (see image). Here, one defines a system as a potential source of
data, an experiment as a process of extracting data from a system by
exerting it through its inputs and a model (M) for a system (S) and an
experiment (E) as anything to which E can be applied in order to answer
questions about S. A computational scientist should be capable of:
recognizing complex problems adequately conceptualizing the system
containing these problems designing a framework of algorithms suitable
for studying this system: the simulation choosing a suitable computing
infrastructure (parallel computing/grid computing/supercomputers)
hereby, maximizing the computational power of the simulation assessing
to what level the output of the simulation resembles the systems: the
model is validated adjusting the conceptualization of the system
accordingly repeat the cycle until a suitable level of validation is
obtained: the computational scientist trusts that the simulation
generates adequately realistic results for the system under the studied
conditionsSubstantial effort in computational sciences has been devoted
to developing algorithms, efficient implementation in programming
languages, and validating computational results. A collection of
problems and solutions in computational science can be found in Steeb,
Hardy, Hardy, and Stoop (2004).Philosophers of science addressed the
question to what degree computational science qualifies as science,
among them Humphreys and Gelfert. They address the general question of
epistemology: how does gain insight from such computational science
approaches? Tolk uses these insights to show the epistemological
constraints of computer-based simulation research. As computational
science uses mathematical models representing the underlying theory in
executable form, in essence, they apply modeling (theory building) and
simulation (implementation and execution). While simulation and
computational science are our most sophisticated way to express our
knowledge and understanding, they also come with all constraints and
limits already known for computational solutions. Applications of
computational science Problem domains for computational
science/scientific computing include: Predictive computational science
Predictive computational science is a scientific discipline concerned
with the formulation, calibration, numerical solution, and validation of
mathematical models designed to predict specific aspects of physical
events, given initial and boundary conditions, and a set of
characterizing parameters and associated uncertainties. In typical
cases, the predictive statement is formulated in terms of probabilities.
For example, given a mechanical component and a periodic loading
condition, \"the probability is (say) 90% that the number of cycles at
failure (Nf) will be in the interval N1
