The Conference and Workshop on Neural Information Processing Systems
(abbreviated as NeurIPS and formerly NIPS) is a machine learning and
computational neuroscience conference held every December. The
conference is currently a double-track meeting (single-track until 2015)
that includes invited talks as well as oral and poster presentations of
refereed papers, followed by parallel-track workshops that up to 2013
were held at ski resorts. History The NeurIPS meeting was first proposed
in 1986 at the annual invitation-only Snowbird Meeting on Neural
Networks for Computing organized by The California Institute of
Technology and Bell Laboratories. NeurIPS was designed as a
complementary open interdisciplinary meeting for researchers exploring
biological and artificial Neural Networks. Reflecting this
multidisciplinary approach, NeurIPS began in 1987 with information
theorist Ed Posner as the conference president and learning theorist
Yaser Abu-Mostafa as program chairman. Research presented in the early
NeurIPS meetings included a wide range of topics from efforts to solve
purely engineering problems to the use of computer models as a tool for
understanding biological nervous systems. Since then, the biological and
artificial systems research streams have diverged, and recent NeurIPS
proceedings have been dominated by papers on machine learning,
artificial intelligence and statistics. From 1987 until 2000 NeurIPS was
held in Denver, United States. Since then, the conference was held in
Vancouver, Canada (2001--2010), Granada, Spain (2011), and Lake Tahoe,
United States (2012--2013). In 2014 and 2015, the conference was held in
Montreal, Canada, in Barcelona, Spain in 2016, in Long Beach, United
States in 2017, in Montreal, Canada in 2018 and Vancouver, Canada in
2019. Reflecting its origins at Snowbird, Utah, the meeting was
accompanied by workshops organized at a nearby ski resort up until 2013,
when it outgrew ski resorts. The first NeurIPS Conference was sponsored
by the IEEE. The following NeurIPS Conferences have been organized by
the NeurIPS Foundation, established by Ed Posner. Terrence Sejnowski has
been the president of the NeurIPS Foundation since Posner\'s death in
1993. The board of trustees consists of previous general chairs of the
NeurIPS Conference. The first proceedings was published in book form by
the American Institute of Physics in 1987, and was entitled Neural
Information Processing Systems, then the proceedings from the following
conferences have been published by Morgan Kaufmann (1988--1993), MIT
Press (1994--2004) and Curran Associates (2005--present) under the name
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems. The conference was
originally abbreviated as \"NIPS\". By 2018 a few commentators were
criticizing the abbreviation as encouraging sexism due to its
association with the word nipples, and as being a slur against Japanese.
The board changed the abbreviation to \"NeurIPS\" in November 2018.
Topics Along with machine learning and neuroscience, other fields
represented at NeurIPS include cognitive science, psychology, computer
vision, statistical linguistics, and information theory. Over the years,
NeurIPS became a premier conference on machine learning and although the
\'Neural\' in the NeurIPS acronym had become something of a historical
relic, the resurgence of deep learning in neural networks since 2012,
fueled by faster computers and big data, has led to achievements in
speech recognition, object recognition in images, image captioning,
language translation and world championship performance in the game of
Go, based on neural architectures inspired by the hierarchy of areas in
the visual cortex (ConvNet) and reinforcement learning inspired by the
basal ganglia (Temporal difference learning). Notable affinity groups
have emerged from the NeurIPS conference and displayed diversity,
including Black in AI (in 2017), Queer in AI (in 2016), and others.
Named lectures In addition to invited talks and symposia, NeurIPS also
organizes two named lectureships to recognize distinguished researchers.
The NeurIPS Board introduced the Posner Lectureship in honor of NeurIPS
founder Ed Posner; two Posner Lectures were given each year up to 2015.
Past lecturers have included: 2010 -- Josh Tenenbaum and Michael I.
Jordan 2011 -- Rich Sutton and Bernhard Schölkopf 2012 -- Thomas
Dietterich and Terry Sejnowski 2013 -- Daphne Koller and Peter Dayan
2014 -- Michael Kearns and John Hopfield 2015 -- Zoubin Ghahramani and
Vladimir Vapnik 2016 -- Yann LeCun 2017 -- John Platt 2018 -- Joëlle
PineauIn 2015, the NeurIPS Board introduced the Breiman Lectureship to
highlight work in statistics relevant to conference topics. The
lectureship was named for statistician Leo Breiman, who served on the
NeurIPS Board from 1994 to 2005. Past lecturers have included: 2015 --
Robert Tibshirani 2016 -- Susan Holmes 2017 -- Yee Whye Teh 2018 --
David Spiegelhalter 2019 -- Bin Yu 2020 -- Marloes Maathuis NIPS
experiment In NIPS 2014, the program chairs duplicated 10% of all
submissions and sent them through separate reviewers to evaluate
randomness in the reviewing process. Several researchers interpreted the
result. Regarding whether the decision in NIPS is completely random or
not, John Langford writes: \"Clearly not---a purely random decision
would have arbitrariness of \~78%. It is, however, quite notable that
60% is much closer to 78% than 0%.\" He concludes that the result of the
reviewing process is mostly arbitrary. Editions Past editions:
1987--2000: Denver, Colorado, United States 2001--2010: Vancouver,
British Columbia, Canada 2011: Granada, Spain, EU 2012 & 2013:
Stateline, Nevada, United States 2014 & 2015: Montréal, Quebec, Canada
2016: Barcelona, Spain, EU 2017: Long Beach, California, United States
2018: Montréal, Quebec, Canada 2019: Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada
2020: Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada (virtual conference) 2021:
Virtual conference 2022: New Orleans, Louisiana, United States See also
AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI) Computational and
Systems Neuroscience (COSYNE) International Conference on Computational
Intelligence Methods for Bioinformatics and Biostatistics (CIBB)
International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR)
International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) Notes External links
2019 Conference NeurIPS proceedings NIPS 2011 video lectures NIPS 2012
video lectures Video Journal of Machine Learning Abstracts -- Volume 3
