Continuous production is a flow production method used to manufacture,
produce, or process materials without interruption. Continuous
production is called a continuous process or a continuous flow process
because the materials, either dry bulk or fluids that are being
processed are continuously in motion, undergoing chemical reactions or
subject to mechanical or heat treatment. Continuous processing is
contrasted with batch production. Continuous usually means operating 24
hours per day, seven days per week with infrequent maintenance
shutdowns, such as semi-annual or annual. Some chemical plants can
operate for more than one to two years without a shutdown. Blast
furnaces can run from four to ten years without stopping. Common
processes Some common continuous processes are the following: Oil
refining Chemicals Synthetic fibers Fertilizers Pulp and paper Blast
furnace (iron) Metal smelting Power stations Natural gas processing
Sanitary waste water treatment Continuous casting of steel Strip
processing lines: eg. pickling lines; tandem rolling mills; electrolytic
tinning and galvanizing lines Rotary kilns for calcining lime or cement
Float glass Dry pasta productionProduction workers in continuous
production commonly work in rotating shifts. Processes are operated
continuously for practical as well as economic reasons. Most of these
industries are very capital intensive and the management is therefore
very concerned about lost operating time. Shutting down and starting up
many continuous processes typically results in off quality product that
must be reprocessed or disposed of. Many tanks, vessels and pipes cannot
be left full of materials because of unwanted chemical reactions,
settling of suspended materials or crystallization or hardening of
materials. Also, cycling temperatures and pressures from starting up and
shutting down certain processes (line kilns, boilers, blast furnaces,
pressure vessels, etc.) may cause metal fatigue or other wear from
pressure or thermal cycling. In the more complex operations there are
sequential shut down and start up procedures that must be carefully
followed in order to protect personnel and equipment. Typically a start
up or shut down will take several hours. Continuous processes use
process control to automate and control operational variables such as
flow rates, tank levels, pressures, temperatures and machine speeds.
Semi-continuous processes Many processes such as assembly lines and
light manufacturing that can be easily shut down and restarted are today
considered semi-continuous. These can be operated for one or two shifts
if necessary. History The oldest continuous flow processes is the blast
furnace for producing pig iron. The blast furnace is intermittently
charged with ore, fuel and flux and intermittently tapped for molten pig
iron and slag; however, the chemical reaction of reducing the iron and
silicon and later oxidizing the silicon is continuous. Semi-continuous
processes, such as machine manufacturing of cigarettes, were called
\"continuous\" when they appeared. Many truly continuous processes of
today were originally batch operations. The Cromford mill of 1771,
designed by Richard Arkwright, was the first factory to use a continuous
process from raw material to finished product in a series of operations.
The Fourdrinier paper machine, patented in 1799, was one of the earliest
of the Industrial Revolution era continuous manufacturing processes. It
produced a continuous web of paper that was formed, pressed, dried and
reeled up in a roll. Previously paper had been made in individual
sheets. The paper machine influenced other continuous processes such as
the continuous rolling of iron and later steel.Another early continuous
processes was Oliver Evans\'es flour mill (ca. 1785), which was fully
automated. Early chemical production and oil refining was done in
batches until process control was sufficiently developed to allow remote
control and automation for continuous processing. Processes began to
operate continuously during the 19th century. By the early 20th century
continuous processes were common. Shut-downs In addition to performing
maintenance, shut downs are also when process modifications are
performed. These include installing new equipment in the main process
flow or tying-in or making provisions to tie-in sub-processes or
equipment that can be installed while the process is operating.
Shut-downs of complicated processes may take weeks or months of
planning. Typically a series of meetings takes place for co-ordination
and planning. These typically involve the various departments such as
maintenance, power, engineering, safety and operating units. All work is
done according to a carefully sequenced schedule that incorporates the
various trades involved, such as pipe-fitters, millwrights,
electricians, mechanics, laborers, etc., and the necessary equipment
(cranes, mobile equipment, air compressors, welding machines,
scaffolding, etc.) and all supplies (spare parts, steel, pipe, wiring,
nuts and bolts) and provisions for power in case power will also be off
as part of the outage. Often one or more outside contractors perform
some of the work, especially if new equipment is installed. Safety
Safety meetings are typically held before and during shutdowns. Other
safety measures include providing adequate ventilation to hot areas or
areas where oxygen may become depleted or toxic gases may be present and
checking vessels and other enclosed areas for adequate levels of oxygen
and ensure absence of toxic or explosive gases. Any machines that are
going to be worked on must be electrically disconnected, usually through
the motor starter, so that it cannot operate. It is common practice to
put a padlock on the motor starter, which can only be unlocked by the
person or persons who is or are endangered by performing the work. Other
disconnect means include removing couplings between the motor and the
equipment or by using mechanical means to keep the equipment from
moving. Valves on pipes connected to vessels that workers will enter are
chained and locked closed, unless some other means is taken to insure
that nothing will come through the pipes. Continuous processor
(equipment) Continuous Production can be supplemented using a Continuous
Processor. Continuous Processors are designed to mix viscous products on
a continuous basis by utilizing a combination of mixing and conveying
action. The Paddles within the mixing chamber (barrel) are mounted on
two co-rotating shafts that are responsible for mixing the material. The
barrels and paddles are contoured in such a way that the paddles create
a self-wiping action between themselves minimizing buildup of product
except for the normal operating clearances of the moving parts. Barrels
may also be heated or cooled to optimize the mixing cycle. Unlike an
extruder, the Continuous Processor void volume mixing area is consistent
the entire length of the barrel ensuring better mixing and little to no
pressure build up. The Continuous Processor works by metering powders,
granules, liquids, etc. into the mixing chamber of the machine. Several
variables allow the Continuous Processor to be versatile for a wide
variety of mixing operations: Barrel Temperature Agitator speed Fed
rate, accuracy of feed Retention time (function of feed rate and volume
of product within mixing chamber)Continuous Processors are used in the
following processes: Compounding Mixing Kneading Shearing Crystallizing
Encapsulating PackingThe Continuous Processor has an unlimited material
mixing capabilities but, it has proven its ability to mix: Plastics
Adhesives Pigments Composites Candy Gum Paste Toners Peanut Butter
Spaghetti/Macaroni Waste Products References Sources and further reading
R H Perry, C H Chilton, D W Green (Ed), Perry\'s Chemical Engineers\'
Handbook (7th Ed), McGraw-Hill (1997), ISBN 978-0-07-049841-9 Major
industries typically each have one or more trade magazines that
constantly feature articles about plant operations, new equipment and
processes and operating and maintenance tips. Trade magazines are one of
the best ways to keep informed of state of the art developments.
