Corinna Cortes is a Danish computer scientist known for her
contributions to machine learning. She is a Vice President at Google
Research in New York City. Cortes is an ACM Fellow and a recipient of
the Paris Kanellakis Award for her work on theoretical foundations of
support vector machines. Early life and education Corinna Cortes was
born in 1961 in Denmark. Cortes received her Master of Science degree in
physics from University of Copenhagen in 1989. She received her PhD in
computer science from the University of Rochester in 1993 for research
supervised by Randal C. Nelson. Career and research Cortes joined joined
AT&T Bell Labs as a researcher in 1993. Since 2003, she has served as
Vice President of Google Research, New York City, and since 2011, as
adjunct professor at the UCPH Department of Computer Science. She is
serves as an editorial board member of the journal Machine
Learning.Cortes\' research covers a wide range of topics in machine
learning, including support vector machines (SVM) and data mining. SVM
is one of the most frequently used algorithms in machine learning, which
is used in many practical applications, including medical diagnosis and
weather forecasting. At AT&T, Cortes was a contributor to the design of
Hancock programming language. Awards and honors In 2008, she jointly
with Vladimir Vapnik received the Paris Kanellakis Award for the
development of a highly effective algorithm for supervised learning
known as support vector machines (SVM). She was awarded ACM Fellowship
in 2023 for theoretical and practical contributions to machine learning,
industrial leadership and service to the field. Personal life Corinna
has two children and is also a competitive runner. == References ==
