Sir David John Cameron MacKay (22 April 1967 -- 14 April 2016) was a
British physicist, mathematician, and academic. He was the Regius
Professor of Engineering in the Department of Engineering at the
University of Cambridge and from 2009 to 2014 was Chief Scientific
Advisor to the UK Department of Energy and Climate Change (DECC). MacKay
wrote the book Sustainable Energy -- Without the Hot Air. Education
MacKay was educated at Newcastle High School and represented Britain in
the International Physics Olympiad in Yugoslavia in 1985, receiving the
first prize for experimental work. He continued his education at Trinity
College, Cambridge, and received a Bachelor of Arts degree in Natural
Sciences (Experimental and theoretical physics) in 1988. He went to the
California Institute of Technology (Caltech) as a Fulbright Scholar,
where his supervisor was John Hopfield. He was awarded a PhD in 1992.
Career and research In January 1992 MacKay was appointed the Royal
Society Smithson Research Fellow at Darwin College, Cambridge,
continuing his cross-disciplinary research in the Cavendish Laboratory,
the Department of Physics of the University of Cambridge. In 1995 he was
made a University Lecturer in the Cavendish Laboratory. He was promoted
in 1999 to a Readership, in 2003 to a Professorship in Natural
Philosophy and in 2013 to the post of Regius Professorship of
Engineering.MacKay\'s contributions in machine learning and information
theory include the development of Bayesian methods for neural networks,
the rediscovery (with Radford M. Neal) of low-density parity-check
codes, and the invention of Dasher, a software application for
communication especially popular with those who cannot use a traditional
keyboard. He cofounded the knowledge management company Transversal. In
2003, his book Information Theory, Inference, and Learning Algorithms
was published. His interests beyond research included the development of
effective teaching methods and African development; he taught regularly
at the African Institute for Mathematical Sciences in Cape Town from its
foundation in 2003 to 2006. In 2008 he completed a book on energy
consumption and energy production without fossil fuels called
Sustainable Energy -- Without the Hot Air. MacKay used Â£10,000 of his
own money to publish the book, and the initial print run of 5,000 sold
within days. The book received praise from The Economist, The Guardian,
and Bill Gates, who called it \"one of the best books on energy that has
been written.\" Like his textbook on Information theory, MacKay made the
book available for free online. In March 2012 he gave a TED talk on
renewable energy.MacKay was appointed to be Chief Scientific Advisor of
the Department of Energy and Climate Change, United Kingdom, in
September 2009. In October 2014, at the end of his five-year term, he
was succeeded by John Loughhead. Awards and honours MacKay was elected a
Fellow of the Royal Society (FRS) in 2009. His certificate of election
reads:David MacKay introduced more efficient types of error-correcting
code that are now used in satellite communications, digital broadcasting
and magnetic recording. He advanced the field of Machine Learning by
providing a sound Bayesian foundation for artificial neural networks.
Using this foundation, he significantly improved their performance,
allowing them to be used for designing new types of steel that are now
used in power stations. He used his expertise in information theory to
design a widely used interface called \"dasher\" that allows disabled
people to write efficiently using a single finger or head-mounted
pointer.\" In the 2016 New Year Honours, MacKay was appointed a Knight
Bachelor \"for services to Scientific Advice in Government and Science
Outreach\", and therefore granted the title sir. Personal life David
MacKay was born the fifth child of Donald MacCrimmon MacKay and Valerie
MacKay. His elder brother Robert S. MacKay FRS (born in 1956) is
Professor of Mathematics at the University of Warwick. David was a
vegetarian.He married Ramesh Ghiassi in 2011. They had a son and a
daughter. Illness and death MacKay was diagnosed with inoperable stomach
cancer (malignant adenocarcinoma) in July 2015, for which he underwent
palliative chemotherapy, a process he documented in detail on his public
personal blog. He died in the afternoon of 14 April 2016. He is survived
by his wife and two children. == References ==
