Discovery is the act of detecting something new, or something previously
unrecognized as meaningful. With reference to sciences and academic
disciplines, discovery is the observation of new phenomena, new actions,
or new events and providing new reasoning to explain the knowledge
gathered through such observations with previously acquired knowledge
from abstract thought and everyday experiences. A discovery may
sometimes be based on earlier discoveries, collaborations, or ideas.
Some discoveries represent a radical breakthrough in knowledge or
technology. New discoveries are acquired through various senses and are
usually assimilated, merging with pre-existing knowledge and actions.
Questioning is a major form of human thought and interpersonal
communication, and plays a key role in discovery. Discoveries are often
made due to questions. Some discoveries lead to the invention of
objects, processes, or techniques. A discovery may sometimes be based on
earlier discoveries, collaborations or ideas, and the process of
discovery requires at least the awareness that an existing concept or
method can be modified or transformed. However, some discoveries also
represent a radical breakthrough in knowledge. In science Within
scientific disciplines, discovery is the observation of new phenomena,
actions, or events which helps explain knowledge gathered through
previously acquired scientific evidence. In science, exploration is one
of three purposes of research, the other two being description and
explanation. Discovery is made by providing observational evidence and
attempts to develop an initial, rough understanding of some phenomenon.
Discovery within the field of particle physics has an accepted
definition for what constitutes a discovery: a five-sigma level of
certainty. Such a level defines statistically how unlikely it is that an
experimental result is due to chance. The combination of a five-sigma
level of certainty, and independent confirmation by other experiments,
turns findings into accepted discoveries. In education Within the field
of education, discovery occurs through observations. These observations
are common and come in various forms. Observations can occur as
observations of students done by the teacher or observations of teachers
done by other professionals. Student observations help teachers to
identify where the students are developmentally and cognitively in the
realm of their studies. Teacher observations are used by administrators
to hold teachers accountable as they stay on target with their learning
goals and treat the students with respect. From these different types of
observations we discover the best possible education practices.
Observations of students completed by teachers Teachers observe students
throughout the day in the classroom. These observations can be informal
or formal. Teachers often use checklist, anecdotal notes, videos,
interviews, written work or assessment, etc. In completing these
observations, teachers can determine at which level the student is
understanding the lessons. Using the information from observations, then
allows teachers to make the necessary adaptations for the students in
the classroom. These observations can also provide the foundation for
strong relationships between teachers and students. When students have
these relationships they feel safer and more comfortable in the
classroom and are more willing and eager to learn. Through observations
teachers discover the most developmentally appropriate practices to
implement in their classrooms. These discoveries encourage and promote
healthier learning styles and positive classroom atmospheres.
Observations of teachers completed by other professionals Within the
education system, there are a set of standards put in place by
government officials. Teachers are responsible for following these
academic standards as a guideline for developmentally appropriate
instruction. Within following those academic goals, teachers are also
observed by administrators to ensure positive classroom environments.
One of the tools that teachers could be graded with is called the
nationally recognized CLASS tool. After using this tool \"over 150
research studies prove that students in classrooms with high CLASS
scores have better academic and social outcomes.\" The tool itself is
known for encouraging positive classroom environments, regard for the
students perspectives, behavior management skills, quality of feedback,
and language modeling. The administrators rate each of the ten
categories with the number scale of one to seven. One being the lowest
score and seven being the highest score that the teacher may receive. It
is through tools such as this one that administrators are able to hold
their teachers to high standards and ensure the best educational
practices for the students. In exploration Western culture has used the
term \"discovery\" in their histories to lay claims over lands and
people as \"discovery\" through discovery doctrines and subtly emphasize
the importance of \"exploration\" in the history of the world, such as
in the \"Age of Discovery\", the New World and any frontierist endeavour
even into space as the \"New Frontier\". In the course of this discovery
has been used to describe the first incursions of peoples from one
culture into the geographical and cultural environment of others.
However, calling it discovery has been rejected by indigenous peoples
from whose perspective, it was not a discovery but a first contact, and
consider the term \"discovery\" to perpetuate colonialism, as for the
discovery doctrine and frontierist concepts like terra nullius.
Discovery and the age of discovery has been alternatively, particularly
regionally, referred to through using the term contact, Age of Contact
or Contact Period. See also References Specific references General
references B Barber (1 September 1961). \"Resistance by scientists to
scientific discovery\". Science. 134 (3479): 596--602.
Bibcode:1961Sci\...134..596B. doi:10.1126/science.134.3479.596. PMID
13686762. Merton, Robert K. (December 1957). \"Priorities in scientific
discovery: a chapter in the sociology of science\" (PDF). American
Sociological Review. 22 (6): 635--659. doi:10.2307/2089193. ISSN
0003-1224. JSTOR 2089193. S2CID 147253305. Archived from the original
(PDF) on 13 January 2021. Carnegie Mellon University Artificial
Intelligence and Psychology Project; Yulin Qin; Herbert A Simon (1990).
\"Laboratory replication of scientific discovery processes\". Cognitive
Science. 14 (2): 281--312. doi:10.1016/0364-0213(90)90005-H. OCLC
832091458. (preprint) A Silberschatz; A Tuzhilin (December 1996). \"What
makes patterns interesting in knowledge discovery systems\". IEEE
Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering. 8 (6): 970--974.
CiteSeerX 10.1.1.127.8150. doi:10.1109/69.553165. S2CID 11430349. Tomasz
Imielinski; Heikki Mannila (November 1996). \"A database perspective on
knowledge discovery\". Communications of the ACM. 39 (11): 58--64.
doi:10.1145/240455.240472. S2CID 7530194. External links A Science
Odyssey: People and discoveries from PBS. TED-Education video - How
simple ideas lead to scientific discoveries. A Guide to Inventions and
Discoveries: From Adrenaline to the Zipper from Infoplease.
