A document management system (DMS) is usually a computerized system used
to store, share, track and manage files or documents. Some systems
include history tracking where a log of the various versions created and
modified by different users is recorded. The term has some overlap with
the concepts of content management systems. It is often viewed as a
component of enterprise content management (ECM) systems and related to
digital asset management, document imaging, workflow systems and records
management systems. History Beginning in the 1980s, a number of vendors
began to develop software systems to manage paper-based documents. These
systems dealt with paper documents, including printed and published
documents and photographs, prints, etc. Later developers began to write
a second type of system that could manage electronic documents, i.e.,
all those documents, or files, created on computers, and often stored on
users\' local file-systems. The earliest Electronic document management
(EDM) systems managed either proprietary file types or a limited number
of file formats. Many of these systems later became known as document
imaging systems, because they focused on the capture, storage, indexing
and retrieval of image file formats. EDM systems evolved to a point
where systems could manage any file format that could be stored on the
network. The applications grew to encompass electronic documents,
collaboration tools, security, workflow, and auditing capabilities.
These systems enabled an organization to capture faxes and forms, to
save copies of the documents as images, and to store the image files in
the repository for security and quick retrieval (retrieval made possible
because the system handled the extraction of the text from the document
in the process of capture, and the text-indexer function provided
text-retrieval capabilities). While many EDM systems store documents in
their native file format (Microsoft Word or Excel, PDF), some web-based
document management systems are beginning to store content in the form
of HTML. These HTML-based document management systems can act as
publishing systems or policy management systems. Content is captured
either by using browser based editors or the importing and conversion of
not HTML content. Storing documents as HTML enables a simpler full-text
workflow as most search engines deal with HTML natively. DMS without an
HTML storage format is required to extract the text from the proprietary
format making the full text search workflow slightly more complicated.
Search capabilities including boolean queries, cluster analysis, and
stemming have become critical components of DMS as users have grown used
to internet searching and spend less time organizing their content.
Components Document management systems commonly provide storage,
versioning, metadata, security, as well as indexing and retrieval
capabilities. Here is a description of these components: Standardization
Many industry associations publish their own lists of particular
document control standards that are used in their particular field.
Following is a list of some of the relevant ISO documents. Divisions ICS
01.140.10 and 01.140.20. The ISO has also published a series of
standards regarding the technical documentation, covered by the division
of 01.110. ISO 2709 Information and documentation -- Format for
information exchange ISO 15836 Information and documentation -- The
Dublin Core metadata element set ISO 15489 Information and documentation
-- Records management ISO 21127 Information and documentation -- A
reference ontology for the interchange of cultural heritage information
ISO 23950 Information and documentation -- Information retrieval
(Z39.50) -- Application service definition and protocol specification
ISO 10244 Document management -- Business process baselining and
analysis ISO 32000 Document management -- Portable document format
ISO/IEC 27001 Specification for an information security management
system Document control Government regulations require that companies
working in certain industries control their documents. These industries
include accounting (for example: 8th EU Directive, Sarbanes--Oxley Act),
food safety (e.g., Food Safety Modernization Act in the US), ISO
(mentioned above), medical device manufacturing (FDA), manufacture of
blood, human cells, and tissue products (FDA), healthcare (JCAHO), and
information technology (ITIL). Some industries work under stricter
document control requirements due to the type of information they retain
for privacy, warranty, or other highly regulated purposes. Examples
include protected health information (PHI) as required by HIPAA or
construction project documents required for warranty periods. An
information systems strategy plan (ISSP) can shape organisational
information systems over medium to long-term periods.Documents stored in
a document management system---such as procedures, work instructions,
and policy statements---provide evidence of documents under control.
Failing to comply can cause fines, the loss of business, or damage to a
business\'s reputation. The following are important aspects of document
control: reviewing and approving documents prior to release reviews and
approvals ensuring changes and revisions are clearly identified ensuring
that relevant versions of applicable documents are available at their
\"points of use\" ensuring that documents remain legible and
identifiable ensuring that external documents (such as customer-supplied
documents or supplier manuals) are identified and controlled preventing
"unintended" use of obsolete documents Integrated DM Integrated document
management comprises the technologies, tools, and methods used to
capture, manage, store, preserve, deliver and dispose of \'documents\'
across an enterprise. In this context \'documents\' are any of a myriad
of information assets including images, office documents, graphics, and
drawings as well as the new electronic objects such as Web pages, email,
instant messages, and video. Document management software Paper
documents have long been used in storing information. However, paper can
be costly and, if used excessively, wasteful. Document management
software is not simply a tool but it lets a user manage access, track
and edit information stored. Document management software is an
electronic cabinet that can be used to organize all paper and digital
files. The software helps the businesses to combine paper to digital
files and store it into a single hub after it is scanned and digital
formats get imported. One of the most important benefits of digital
document management is a "fail-safe" environment for safeguarding all
documents and data. In the heavy construction industry specifically,
document management software allows team members to securely view and
upload documents for projects they are assigned to from anywhere and at
any time to help streamline day-to-day operations. See also References
External links Software/Document Management at Curlie
