Email filtering is the processing of email to organize it according to
specified criteria. The term can apply to the intervention of human
intelligence, but most often refers to the automatic processing of
messages at an SMTP server, possibly applying anti-spam techniques.
Filtering can be applied to incoming emails as well as to outgoing ones.
Depending on the calling environment, email filtering software can
reject an item at the initial SMTP connection stage or pass it through
unchanged for delivery to the user\'s mailbox. It is also possible to
redirect the message for delivery elsewhere, quarantine it for further
checking, modify it or \'tag\' it in any other way. Motivation Common
uses for mail filters include organizing incoming email and removal of
spam and computer viruses. Mailbox providers filter outgoing email to
promptly react to spam surges that may result from compromised accounts.
A less common use is to inspect outgoing email at some companies to
ensure that employees comply with appropriate policies and laws. Users
might also employ a mail filter to prioritize messages, and to sort them
into folders based on subject matter or other criteria. Methods Mailbox
providers can also install mail filters in their mail transfer agents as
a service to all of their customers. Anti-virus, anti-spam, URL
filtering, and authentication-based rejections are common filter types.
Corporations often use filters to protect their employees and their
information technology assets. A catch-all filter will \"catch all\" of
the emails addressed to the domain that do not exist in the mail
server - this can help avoid losing emails due to misspelling. Users,
may be able to install separate programs (see links below), or configure
filtering as part of their email program (email client). In email
programs, users can make personal, \"manual\" filters that then
automatically filter mail according to the chosen criteria. Inbound and
outbound filtering Mail filters can operate on inbound and outbound
email traffic. Inbound email filtering involves scanning messages from
the Internet addressed to users protected by the filtering system or for
lawful interception. Outbound email filtering involves the reverse -
scanning email messages from local users before any potentially harmful
messages can be delivered to others on the Internet. One method of
outbound email filtering that is commonly used by Internet service
providers is transparent SMTP proxying, in which email traffic is
intercepted and filtered via a transparent proxy within the network.
Outbound filtering can also take place in an email server. Many
corporations employ data leak prevention technology in their outbound
mail servers to prevent the leakage of sensitive information via email.
Customization Mail filters have varying degrees of configurability.
Sometimes they make decisions based on matching a regular expression.
Other times, code may match keywords in the message body, or perhaps the
email address of the sender of the message. More complex control flow
and logic is possible with programming languages; this is typically
implemented with a data-driven programming language, such as procmail,
which specifies conditions to match and actions to take on matching,
which may involve further matching. Some more advanced filters,
particularly anti-spam filters, use statistical document classification
techniques such as the naive Bayes classifier while others use natural
language processing to organize incoming emails. Image filtering can use
complex image-analysis algorithms to detect skin-tones and specific body
shapes normally associated with pornographic images. Microsoft Outlook
includes user-generated email filters called \"rules\". See also
Bayesian spam filtering CRM114 Information filtering Markovian
discrimination Outbound Spam Protection Sieve (mail filtering language)
is an RFC standard for describing mail filters White list#Email
whitelists References External links Spam filtering at Curlie
