Enterprise software, also known as enterprise application software
(EAS), is computer software used to satisfy the needs of an organization
rather than individual users. Such organizations include businesses,
schools, interest-based user groups, clubs, charities, and governments.
Enterprise software is an integral part of a (computer-based)
information system; a collection of such software is called an
enterprise system. These systems handle a number of operations in an
organization to enhance the business and management reporting tasks. The
systems must process the information at a relatively high speed and can
be deployed across a variety of networks.Services provided by enterprise
software are typically business-oriented tools. As enterprises have
similar departments and systems in common, enterprise software is often
available as a suite of customizable programs. Generally, the complexity
of these tools requires specialist capabilities and specific knowledge.
Enterprise computing is the information technology (IT) tool that
businesses use for efficient production operations and back-office
support. These IT tools cover database management, customer relationship
management, supply chain management, business process management and so
on. Definitions Enterprise software is a collection of computer programs
that have common business applications, tools for modeling how the
entire organization works, and development tools for building
applications unique to the organization. The software is intended to
solve an enterprise-wide problem, rather than a departmental problem.
Enterprise-level software aims to improve the enterprise\'s productivity
and efficiency by providing business logic support functionality.
According to Martin Fowler, \"Enterprise applications are about the
display, manipulation, and storage of large amounts of often complex
data and the support or automation of business processes with that
data.\"Although there is no single, widely accepted list of enterprise
software characteristics, they generally include performance,
scalability, and robustness. Furthermore, enterprise software typically
has interfaces to other enterprise software (for example LDAP to
directory services) and is centrally managed (a single admin page, for
example).Enterprise application software performs business functions
such as order processing, procurement, production scheduling, customer
information management, energy management, and accounting. It is
typically hosted on servers and provides simultaneous services to many
users, typically over a computer network. This is in contrast to a
single-user application that is executed on a user\'s personal computer
and serves only one user at a time. Enterprise system Enterprise systems
(ES) are large-scale enterprise software packages that support business
processes, information flows, reporting, and data analytics in complex
organizations. While ES are generally packaged enterprise application
software (PEAS) systems they can also be bespoke, custom-developed
systems created to support a specific organization\'s needs. Types of
enterprise systems include: enterprise resources planning (ERP) systems,
enterprise planning systems, and customer relationship management
software.Although data warehousing or business intelligence systems are
enterprise-wide packaged application software often sold by ES vendors,
since they do not directly support execution of business processes, they
are often excluded from the term. Enterprise systems are built on
software platforms, such as SAP\'s NetWeaver and Oracle\'s Fusion, and
databases. From a hardware perspective, enterprise systems are the
servers, storage and associated software that large businesses use as
the foundation for their IT infrastructure. These systems are designed
to manage large volumes of critical data and thus are typically designed
to provide high levels of transaction performance and data security.
Types Enterprise software can be categorized by business function. Each
type of enterprise application can be considered a \"system\" due to the
integration with a firm\'s business processes. Categories of enterprise
software may overlap due to this systemic interpretation. For example,
IBM\'s Business Intelligence platform (Cognos), integrates with a
predictive analytics platform (SPSS) and can obtain records from its
database packages (Infosphere, DB2). Blurred lines between package
functions make delimitation difficult, and larger software companies
define these somewhat arbitrary categories in many ways. Nevertheless,
certain industry-standard product categories have emerged, and these are
shown below: Business Intelligence (BI) Business Process Management
(BPM) Content Management System (CMS) Customer Relationship Management
(CRM) DataBase Management System (DBMS) - such as Master Data Management
(MDM) and Data Warehousing (DW, DWH or EDW) Enterprise Resource Planning
(ERP) - which is a broad category covering Accounting, Human Resource,
Corporate performance and governance, Customer Services, Sales,
Procurement, Production, and Distribution Enterprise Asset Management
(EAM) Human Resource Management (HRM) Knowledge Management (KM) Low-code
Development Platforms (LCDP) Product Data Management (PDM) Product
Information Management (PIM) Product Lifecycle Management (PLM) Supply
Chain Management (SCM) Software Configuration Management (SCM) - such as
Version Control System (VCS) Networking and Information Security
Intrusion Detection Prevention (IDS) - and by extension Intrusion
Prevention System (IPS) Software Defined Networking (SDN) - including
SD-WAN Security Information Event Management (SIEM) - which can combine
Security Information Management (SIM) and Security Event Management
(SEM) Others types of software which do not fit into well-known standard
categories, including backup software, Billing Management, Accounting
software See also Application Release Automation Software Application
software Business informatics Business software Enterprise architecture
Enterprise forms automation Enterprise planning system Global
Information Network Architecture IBM Smarter Computing Identity
management Identity management system Information technology management
Integrated business planning Management information system Operational
risk management Retail software Server (computing) Strategic information
system == References ==
