In statistics and optimization, errors and residuals are two closely
related and easily confused measures of the deviation of an observed
value of an element of a statistical sample from its \"true value\" (not
necessarily observable). The error of an observation is the deviation of
the observed value from the true value of a quantity of interest (for
example, a population mean). The residual is the difference between the
observed value and the estimated value of the quantity of interest (for
example, a sample mean). The distinction is most important in regression
analysis, where the concepts are sometimes called the regression errors
and regression residuals and where they lead to the concept of
studentized residuals. In econometrics, \"errors\" are also called
disturbances. Introduction Suppose there is a series of observations
from a univariate distribution and we want to estimate the mean of that
distribution (the so-called location model). In this case, the errors
are the deviations of the observations from the population mean, while
the residuals are the deviations of the observations from the sample
mean. A statistical error (or disturbance) is the amount by which an
observation differs from its expected value, the latter being based on
the whole population from which the statistical unit was chosen
randomly. For example, if the mean height in a population of 21-year-old
men is 1.75 meters, and one randomly chosen man is 1.80 meters tall,
then the \"error\" is 0.05 meters; if the randomly chosen man is 1.70
meters tall, then the \"error\" is −0.05 meters. The expected value,
being the mean of the entire population, is typically unobservable, and
hence the statistical error cannot be observed either. A residual (or
fitting deviation), on the other hand, is an observable estimate of the
unobservable statistical error. Consider the previous example with
men\'s heights and suppose we have a random sample of n people. The
sample mean could serve as a good estimator of the population mean. Then
we have: The difference between the height of each man in the sample and
the unobservable population mean is a statistical error, whereas The
difference between the height of each man in the sample and the
observable sample mean is a residual.Note that, because of the
definition of the sample mean, the sum of the residuals within a random
sample is necessarily zero, and thus the residuals are necessarily not
independent. The statistical errors, on the other hand, are independent,
and their sum within the random sample is almost surely not zero. One
can standardize statistical errors (especially of a normal distribution)
in a z-score (or \"standard score\"), and standardize residuals in a
t-statistic, or more generally studentized residuals. In univariate
distributions If we assume a normally distributed population with mean μ
and standard deviation σ, and choose individuals independently, then we
have X 1 , ... , X n ∼ N ( μ , σ 2 ) {\\displaystyle X\_{1},\\dots
,X\_{n}\\sim N\\left(\\mu ,\\sigma \^{2}\\right)\\,} and the sample mean
X ¯ = X 1 + ⋯ + X n n {\\displaystyle {\\overline {X}}={X\_{1}+\\cdots
+X\_{n} \\over n}} is a random variable distributed such that: X ¯ ∼ N (
μ , σ 2 n ) . {\\displaystyle {\\overline {X}}\\sim N\\left(\\mu
,{\\frac {\\sigma \^{2}}{n}}\\right).} The statistical errors are then e
i = X i − μ , {\\displaystyle e\_{i}=X\_{i}-\\mu ,\\,} with expected
values of zero, whereas the residuals are r i = X i − X ¯ .
{\\displaystyle r\_{i}=X\_{i}-{\\overline {X}}.} The sum of squares of
the statistical errors, divided by σ2, has a chi-squared distribution
with n degrees of freedom: 1 σ 2 ∑ i = 1 n e i 2 ∼ χ n 2 .
{\\displaystyle {\\frac {1}{\\sigma \^{2}}}\\sum
\_{i=1}\^{n}e\_{i}\^{2}\\sim \\chi \_{n}\^{2}.} However, this quantity
is not observable as the population mean is unknown. The sum of squares
of the residuals, on the other hand, is observable. The quotient of that
sum by σ2 has a chi-squared distribution with only n − 1 degrees of
freedom: 1 σ 2 ∑ i = 1 n r i 2 ∼ χ n − 1 2 . {\\displaystyle {\\frac
{1}{\\sigma \^{2}}}\\sum \_{i=1}\^{n}r\_{i}\^{2}\\sim \\chi
\_{n-1}\^{2}.} This difference between n and n − 1 degrees of freedom
results in Bessel\'s correction for the estimation of sample variance of
a population with unknown mean and unknown variance. No correction is
necessary if the population mean is known. Remark It is remarkable that
the sum of squares of the residuals and the sample mean can be shown to
be independent of each other, using, e.g. Basu\'s theorem. That fact,
and the normal and chi-squared distributions given above form the basis
of calculations involving the t-statistic: T = X ¯ n − μ 0 S n / n ,
{\\displaystyle T={\\frac {{\\overline {X}}\_{n}-\\mu
\_{0}}{S\_{n}/{\\sqrt {n}}}},} where X ¯ n − μ 0 {\\displaystyle
{\\overline {X}}\_{n}-\\mu \_{0}} represents the errors, S n
{\\displaystyle S\_{n}} represents the sample standard deviation for a
sample of size n, and unknown σ, and the denominator term S n / n
{\\displaystyle S\_{n}/{\\sqrt {n}}} accounts for the standard deviation
of the errors according to: The probability distributions of the
numerator and the denominator separately depend on the value of the
unobservable population standard deviation σ, but σ appears in both the
numerator and the denominator and cancels. That is fortunate because it
means that even though we do not know σ, we know the probability
distribution of this quotient: it has a Student\'s t-distribution with n
− 1 degrees of freedom. We can therefore use this quotient to find a
confidence interval for μ. This t-statistic can be interpreted as \"the
number of standard errors away from the regression line.\" Regressions
In regression analysis, the distinction between errors and residuals is
subtle and important, and leads to the concept of studentized residuals.
Given an unobservable function that relates the independent variable to
the dependent variable -- say, a line -- the deviations of the dependent
variable observations from this function are the unobservable errors. If
one runs a regression on some data, then the deviations of the dependent
variable observations from the fitted function are the residuals. If the
linear model is applicable, a scatterplot of residuals plotted against
the independent variable should be random about zero with no trend to
the residuals. If the data exhibit a trend, the regression model is
likely incorrect; for example, the true function may be a quadratic or
higher order polynomial. If they are random, or have no trend, but \"fan
out\" - they exhibit a phenomenon called heteroscedasticity. If all of
the residuals are equal, or do not fan out, they exhibit
homoscedasticity. However, a terminological difference arises in the
expression mean squared error (MSE). The mean squared error of a
regression is a number computed from the sum of squares of the computed
residuals, and not of the unobservable errors. If that sum of squares is
divided by n, the number of observations, the result is the mean of the
squared residuals. Since this is a biased estimate of the variance of
the unobserved errors, the bias is removed by dividing the sum of the
squared residuals by df = n − p − 1, instead of n, where df is the
number of degrees of freedom (n minus the number of parameters
(excluding the intercept) p being estimated - 1). This forms an unbiased
estimate of the variance of the unobserved errors, and is called the
mean squared error.Another method to calculate the mean square of error
when analyzing the variance of linear regression using a technique like
that used in ANOVA (they are the same because ANOVA is a type of
regression), the sum of squares of the residuals (aka sum of squares of
the error) is divided by the degrees of freedom (where the degrees of
freedom equal n − p − 1, where p is the number of parameters estimated
in the model (one for each variable in the regression equation, not
including the intercept)). One can then also calculate the mean square
of the model by dividing the sum of squares of the model minus the
degrees of freedom, which is just the number of parameters. Then the F
value can be calculated by dividing the mean square of the model by the
mean square of the error, and we can then determine significance (which
is why you want the mean squares to begin with.).However, because of the
behavior of the process of regression, the distributions of residuals at
different data points (of the input variable) may vary even if the
errors themselves are identically distributed. Concretely, in a linear
regression where the errors are identically distributed, the variability
of residuals of inputs in the middle of the domain will be higher than
the variability of residuals at the ends of the domain: linear
regressions fit endpoints better than the middle. This is also reflected
in the influence functions of various data points on the regression
coefficients: endpoints have more influence. Thus to compare residuals
at different inputs, one needs to adjust the residuals by the expected
variability of residuals, which is called studentizing. This is
particularly important in the case of detecting outliers, where the case
in question is somehow different from the others in a dataset. For
example, a large residual may be expected in the middle of the domain,
but considered an outlier at the end of the domain. Other uses of the
word \"error\" in statistics The use of the term \"error\" as discussed
in the sections above is in the sense of a deviation of a value from a
hypothetical unobserved value. At least two other uses also occur in
statistics, both referring to observable prediction errors: The mean
squared error (MSE) refers to the amount by which the values predicted
by an estimator differ from the quantities being estimated (typically
outside the sample from which the model was estimated). The root mean
square error (RMSE) is the square-root of MSE. The sum of squares of
errors (SSE) is the MSE multiplied by the sample size. Sum of squares of
residuals (SSR) is the sum of the squares of the deviations of the
actual values from the predicted values, within the sample used for
estimation. This is the basis for the least squares estimate, where the
regression coefficients are chosen such that the SSR is minimal (i.e.
its derivative is zero). Likewise, the sum of absolute errors (SAE) is
the sum of the absolute values of the residuals, which is minimized in
the least absolute deviations approach to regression. The mean error
(ME) is the bias. The mean residual (MR) is always zero for
least-squares estimators. See also References Cook, R. Dennis; Weisberg,
Sanford (1982). Residuals and Influence in Regression (Repr. ed.). New
York: Chapman and Hall. ISBN 041224280X. Retrieved 23 February 2013.
Cox, David R.; Snell, E. Joyce (1968). \"A general definition of
residuals\". Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B. 30 (2):
248--275. JSTOR 2984505. Weisberg, Sanford (1985). Applied Linear
Regression (2nd ed.). New York: Wiley. ISBN 9780471879572. Retrieved 23
February 2013. \"Errors, theory of\", Encyclopedia of Mathematics, EMS
Press, 2001 \[1994\] External links Media related to Errors and
residuals at Wikimedia Commons
