In statistics, exploratory data analysis (EDA) is an approach of
analyzing data sets to summarize their main characteristics, often using
statistical graphics and other data visualization methods. A statistical
model can be used or not, but primarily EDA is for seeing what the data
can tell us beyond the formal modeling and thereby contrasts traditional
hypothesis testing. Exploratory data analysis has been promoted by John
Tukey since 1970 to encourage statisticians to explore the data, and
possibly formulate hypotheses that could lead to new data collection and
experiments. EDA is different from initial data analysis (IDA), which
focuses more narrowly on checking assumptions required for model fitting
and hypothesis testing, and handling missing values and making
transformations of variables as needed. EDA encompasses IDA. Overview
Tukey defined data analysis in 1961 as: \"Procedures for analyzing data,
techniques for interpreting the results of such procedures, ways of
planning the gathering of data to make its analysis easier, more precise
or more accurate, and all the machinery and results of (mathematical)
statistics which apply to analyzing data.\"Tukey\'s championing of EDA
encouraged the development of statistical computing packages, especially
S at Bell Labs. The S programming language inspired the systems S-PLUS
and R. This family of statistical-computing environments featured vastly
improved dynamic visualization capabilities, which allowed statisticians
to identify outliers, trends and patterns in data that merited further
study. Tukey\'s EDA was related to two other developments in statistical
theory: robust statistics and nonparametric statistics, both of which
tried to reduce the sensitivity of statistical inferences to errors in
formulating statistical models. Tukey promoted the use of five number
summary of numerical data---the two extremes (maximum and minimum), the
median, and the quartiles---because these median and quartiles, being
functions of the empirical distribution are defined for all
distributions, unlike the mean and standard deviation; moreover, the
quartiles and median are more robust to skewed or heavy-tailed
distributions than traditional summaries (the mean and standard
deviation). The packages S, S-PLUS, and R included routines using
resampling statistics, such as Quenouille and Tukey\'s jackknife and
Efron\'s bootstrap, which are nonparametric and robust (for many
problems). Exploratory data analysis, robust statistics, nonparametric
statistics, and the development of statistical programming languages
facilitated statisticians\' work on scientific and engineering problems.
Such problems included the fabrication of semiconductors and the
understanding of communications networks, which concerned Bell Labs.
These statistical developments, all championed by Tukey, were designed
to complement the analytic theory of testing statistical hypotheses,
particularly the Laplacian tradition\'s emphasis on exponential
families. Development John W. Tukey wrote the book Exploratory Data
Analysis in 1977. Tukey held that too much emphasis in statistics was
placed on statistical hypothesis testing (confirmatory data analysis);
more emphasis needed to be placed on using data to suggest hypotheses to
test. In particular, he held that confusing the two types of analyses
and employing them on the same set of data can lead to systematic bias
owing to the issues inherent in testing hypotheses suggested by the
data. The objectives of EDA are to: Enable unexpected discoveries in the
data Suggest hypotheses about the causes of observed phenomena Assess
assumptions on which statistical inference will be based Support the
selection of appropriate statistical tools and techniques Provide a
basis for further data collection through surveys or experimentsMany EDA
techniques have been adopted into data mining. They are also being
taught to young students as a way to introduce them to statistical
thinking. Techniques and tools There are a number of tools that are
useful for EDA, but EDA is characterized more by the attitude taken than
by particular techniques.Typical graphical techniques used in EDA are:
Box plot Histogram Multi-vari chart Run chart Pareto chart Scatter plot
(2D/3D) Stem-and-leaf plot Parallel coordinates Odds ratio Targeted
projection pursuit Heat map Bar chart Horizon graph Glyph-based
visualization methods such as PhenoPlot and Chernoff faces Projection
methods such as grand tour, guided tour and manual tour Interactive
versions of these plotsDimensionality reduction: Multidimensional
scaling Principal component analysis (PCA) Multilinear PCA Nonlinear
dimensionality reduction (NLDR) Iconography of correlationsTypical
quantitative techniques are: Median polish Trimean Ordination History
Many EDA ideas can be traced back to earlier authors, for example:
Francis Galton emphasized order statistics and quantiles. Arthur Lyon
Bowley used precursors of the stemplot and five-number summary (Bowley
actually used a \"seven-figure summary\", including the extremes,
deciles and quartiles, along with the median---see his Elementary Manual
of Statistics (3rd edn., 1920), p. 62-- he defines \"the maximum and
minimum, median, quartiles and two deciles\" as the \"seven
positions\"). Andrew Ehrenberg articulated a philosophy of data
reduction (see his book of the same name).The Open University course
Statistics in Society (MDST 242), took the above ideas and merged them
with Gottfried Noether\'s work, which introduced statistical inference
via coin-tossing and the median test. Example Findings from EDA are
orthogonal to the primary analysis task. To illustrate, consider an
example from Cook et al. where the analysis task is to find the
variables which best predict the tip that a dining party will give to
the waiter. The variables available in the data collected for this task
are: the tip amount, total bill, payer gender, smoking/non-smoking
section, time of day, day of the week, and size of the party. The
primary analysis task is approached by fitting a regression model where
the tip rate is the response variable. The fitted model is (tip rate) =
0.18 - 0.01 Ã— (party size)which says that as the size of the dining
party increases by one person (leading to a higher bill), the tip rate
will decrease by 1%, on average. However, exploring the data reveals
other interesting features not described by this model. What is learned
from the plots is different from what is illustrated by the regression
model, even though the experiment was not designed to investigate any of
these other trends. The patterns found by exploring the data suggest
hypotheses about tipping that may not have been anticipated in advance,
and which could lead to interesting follow-up experiments where the
hypotheses are formally stated and tested by collecting new data.
Software JMP, an EDA package from SAS Institute. KNIME, Konstanz
Information Miner -- Open-Source data exploration platform based on
Eclipse. Minitab, an EDA and general statistics package widely used in
industrial and corporate settings. Orange, an open-source data mining
and machine learning software suite. Python, an open-source programming
language widely used in data mining and machine learning. R, an
open-source programming language for statistical computing and graphics.
Together with Python one of the most popular languages for data science.
TinkerPlots an EDA software for upper elementary and middle school
students. Weka an open source data mining package that includes
visualization and EDA tools such as targeted projection pursuit. See
also Anscombe\'s quartet, on importance of exploration Data dredging
Predictive analytics Structured data analysis (statistics) Configural
frequency analysis Descriptive statistics References Bibliography
Andrienko, N & Andrienko, G (2005) Exploratory Analysis of Spatial and
Temporal Data. A Systematic Approach. Springer. ISBN 3-540-25994-5 Cook,
D. and Swayne, D.F. (with A. Buja, D. Temple Lang, H. Hofmann, H.
Wickham, M. Lawrence) (2007-12-12). Interactive and Dynamic Graphics for
Data Analysis: With R and GGobi. Springer. ISBN 9780387717616.{{cite
book}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list (link)Andrienko, N &
Andrienko, G (2005) Exploratory Analysis of Spatial and Temporal Data. A
Systematic Approach. Springer. ISBN 3-540-25994-5Cook, D. and Swayne,
D.F. (with A. Buja, D. Temple Lang, H. Hofmann, H. Wickham, M. Lawrence)
(2007-12-12). Interactive and Dynamic Graphics for Data Analysis: With R
and GGobi. Springer. ISBN 9780387717616. Hoaglin, D C; Mosteller, F &
Tukey, John Wilder (Eds) (1985). Exploring Data Tables, Trends and
Shapes. ISBN 978-0-471-09776-1. Hoaglin, D C; Mosteller, F & Tukey, John
Wilder (Eds) (1983). Understanding Robust and Exploratory Data Analysis.
ISBN 978-0-471-09777-8. Young, F. W. Valero-Mora, P. and Friendly M.
(2006) Visual Statistics: Seeing your data with Dynamic Interactive
Graphics. Wiley ISBN 978-0-471-68160-1 Jambu M. (1991) Exploratory and
Multivariate Data Analysis. Academic Press ISBN 0123800900 S. H. C.
DuToit, A. G. W. Steyn, R. H. Stumpf (1986) Graphical Exploratory Data
Analysis. Springer ISBN 978-1-4612-9371-2 Hoaglin, D C; Mosteller, F &
Tukey, John Wilder (Eds) (1985). Exploring Data Tables, Trends and
Shapes. ISBN 978-0-471-09776-1.{{cite book}}: CS1 maint: multiple names:
authors list (link) Hoaglin, D C; Mosteller, F & Tukey, John Wilder
(Eds) (1983). Understanding Robust and Exploratory Data Analysis. ISBN
978-0-471-09777-8.{{cite book}}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list
(link) Inselberg, Alfred (2009). Parallel Coordinates:Visual
Multidimensional Geometry and its Applications. London New York:
Springer. ISBN 978-0-387-68628-8. Leinhardt, G., Leinhardt, S.,
Exploratory Data Analysis: New Tools for the Analysis of Empirical Data,
Review of Research in Education, Vol. 8, 1980 (1980), pp. 85--157.
Martinez, W. L.; Martinez, A. R. & Solka, J. (2010). Exploratory Data
Analysis with MATLAB, second edition. Chapman & Hall/CRC. ISBN
9781439812204. Theus, M., Urbanek, S. (2008), Interactive Graphics for
Data Analysis: Principles and Examples, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, ISBN
978-1-58488-594-8 Tucker, L; MacCallum, R. (1993). Exploratory Factor
Analysis. \[1\]. {{cite book}}: External link in \|location= (help)
Tukey, John Wilder (1977). Exploratory Data Analysis. Addison-Wesley.
ISBN 978-0-201-07616-5. Velleman, P. F.; Hoaglin, D. C. (1981).
Applications, Basics and Computing of Exploratory Data Analysis. ISBN
978-0-87150-409-8. Young, F. W. Valero-Mora, P. and Friendly M. (2006)
Visual Statistics: Seeing your data with Dynamic Interactive Graphics.
Wiley ISBN 978-0-471-68160-1 Jambu M. (1991) Exploratory and
Multivariate Data Analysis. Academic Press ISBN 0123800900 S. H. C.
DuToit, A. G. W. Steyn, R. H. Stumpf (1986) Graphical Exploratory Data
Analysis. Springer ISBN 978-1-4612-9371-2Andrienko, N & Andrienko, G
(2005) Exploratory Analysis of Spatial and Temporal Data. A Systematic
Approach. Springer. ISBN 3-540-25994-5 Cook, D. and Swayne, D.F. (with
A. Buja, D. Temple Lang, H. Hofmann, H. Wickham, M. Lawrence)
(2007-12-12). Interactive and Dynamic Graphics for Data Analysis: With R
and GGobi. Springer. ISBN 9780387717616. Hoaglin, D C; Mosteller, F &
Tukey, John Wilder (Eds) (1985). Exploring Data Tables, Trends and
Shapes. ISBN 978-0-471-09776-1. Hoaglin, D C; Mosteller, F & Tukey, John
Wilder (Eds) (1983). Understanding Robust and Exploratory Data Analysis.
ISBN 978-0-471-09777-8. Young, F. W. Valero-Mora, P. and Friendly M.
(2006) Visual Statistics: Seeing your data with Dynamic Interactive
Graphics. Wiley ISBN 978-0-471-68160-1 Jambu M. (1991) Exploratory and
Multivariate Data Analysis. Academic Press ISBN 0123800900 S. H. C.
DuToit, A. G. W. Steyn, R. H. Stumpf (1986) Graphical Exploratory Data
Analysis. Springer ISBN 978-1-4612-9371-2 External links Carnegie Mellon
University -- free online course on Probability and Statistics, with a
module on EDA â€¢ Exploratory data analysis chapter: engineering
statistics handbook
