Generalization is the concept that humans, other animals, and artificial
neural networks use past learning in present situations of learning if
the conditions in the situations are regarded as similar. The learner
uses generalized patterns, principles, and other similarities between
past experiences and novel experiences to more efficiently navigate the
world. For example, if a person has learned in the past that every time
they eat an apple, their throat becomes itchy and swollen, they might
assume they are allergic to all fruit. When this person is offered a
banana to eat, they reject it upon assuming they are also allergic to it
through generalizing that all fruits cause the same reaction. Although
this generalization about being allergic to all fruit based on
experiences with one fruit could be correct in some cases, it may not be
correct in all. Both positive and negative effects have been shown in
education through learned generalization and its contrasting notion of
discrimination learning. Overview Generalization is understood to be
directly tied to the transfer of knowledge across multiple situations.
The knowledge to be transferred is often referred to as abstractions,
because the learner abstracts a rule or pattern of characteristics from
previous experiences with similar stimuli. Generalization allows humans
and animals to recognize the similarities in knowledge acquired in one
circumstance, allowing for transfer of knowledge onto new situations.
This idea rivals the theory of situated cognition, instead stating that
one can apply past knowledge to learning in new situations and
environments. Generalization can be supported and partly explained by
the connectionism approach. Just as artificial intelligences learn to
distinguish between different categories by applying past learning to
novel situations, humans and animals generalize previously learned
properties and patterns onto new situations, thus connecting the novel
experience to past experiences that are similar in one or more ways.
This creates a pattern of connections that allows the learner to
classify and make assumptions about the novel stimulus, such as when
previous experience with seeing a canary allows the learner to predict
what other birds will be like. This categorization is a foundational
aspect of generalizing. Research on generalization In scientific studies
looking at generalization, a generalization gradient is often used. This
tool is used to measure how often and how much animals or humans respond
to certain stimuli, depending on whether the stimuli are perceived to be
similar or different. The curvilinear shape of the gradient is achieved
by placing the perceived similarity of a stimulus on the x-axis and the
strength of the response on the y-axis. For example, when measuring
responses to color, it is expected that subjects will respond to colors
that are similar to each other, like shades of pink after being exposed
to red, as opposed to a non-similar shade of blue. The gradient is
relatively predictable, with the response to similar stimuli being
slightly less strong than the response to the conditioned stimulus, then
steadily declining as the presented stimuli become increasingly
dissimilar.Several studies have suggested that generalization is a
fundamental and naturally-occurring learning process for humans.
Nine-month-old infants require very few (sometimes only 3) experiences
with a category before learning to generalize. In fact, infants
generalize so well during early stages of development (such as learning
to recognize specific sounds as language) that it can be hard for them
to discriminate between variations of the generalized stimuli at later
stages of development (such as failing to distinguish between the subtly
different sounds of similar phonemes). One potential explanation for why
children are such efficient learners is that they operate in accordance
with the goal of making their world more predictable, therefore
encouraging them to hold strongly to generalizations that effectively
help them to navigate their environment.Some evidence suggests that
children are born with innate processes for accurately generalizing
things. For example, children tend to generalize based on taxonomic
rather than thematic similarities (an experience with one ball leads to
the child identifying other ball-shaped objects as "ball" rather than
labeling a bat as "ball" because a bat is used to hit a ball).Wakefield,
Hall, James, and Goldin (2018) found that children are more flexible in
generalizing new verbs when they are taught the verb by observing
gestures as opposed to being taught by performing the action themselves.
When helping a child learn a new word, providing more examples of the
word increases the child's capacity to generalize the word to different
contexts and situations. Furthermore, writing interventions for
grade-school students yield better results when the intervention
actively targets generalization as an outcome.Generalization has been
shown to be refined and/or stabilized after sleep. Implications Without
the ability to generalize, it would likely be very difficult to navigate
the world in a useful way. For example, generalization is an important
part of how humans learn to trust unfamiliar people and a necessary
element in language acquisition.For a person who lacked the capacity to
generalize from one experience to the next, every instance of a dog
would be completely separated from other instances of dogs, so prior
experience would do nothing to help the person know how to interact with
this seemingly new stimulus. In fact, even if the person experienced the
very same dog multiple times, he or she would have no way of knowing
what to expect and each instance would be as if the individual were
encountering a dog for the first time. Therefore, generalization is a
valuable and integral part of learning and everyday life. Generalization
is shown to have implications on the use of the spacing effect in
educational settings. In the past, it was thought that the information
forgotten between periods of learning when implementing spaced
presentation inhibited generalization. In more recent years, this
forgetting has been seen as promoting generalization through repetition
of information during each occasion of spaced learning. The effects of
gaining long-term generalization knowledge through spaced learning can
be compared with that of massed learning (lengthy and all at once; for
example, cramming the night before an exam) in which a person only gains
short-term knowledge, decreasing the likelihood of establishing
generalization. Generalization is also considered to be an important
factor in procedural memory, such as the near-automatic memory processes
necessary for driving a car. Without being able to generalize from
previous experiences driving, a person would essentially need to relearn
how to drive every time he or she encountered a new street. Not all of
generalization's effects are beneficial, however. An important part of
learning is knowing when not to generalize, which is called
discrimination learning. Were it not for discrimination learning, humans
and animals would struggle to respond correctly to different situations.
For example, a dog may be trained to come to its owner when it hears a
whistle. If the dog generalizes this training, it may not discriminate
between the sound of the whistle and other stimuli, so it would come
running to its owner when it hears any high-pitched noise. Fear
generalization A specific type of generalization, fear generalization,
occurs when a person associates fears learned in the past through
classical conditioning to similar situations, events, people, and
objects in their present. This is important for the survival of the
organism; humans and animals need to be able to assess aversive
situations and respond appropriately based on generalizations made from
past experiences.When fear generalization becomes maladaptive it is
connected to many anxiety disorders. This maladaptation is often
referred to as the overgeneralization of fear and can also lead to the
development of posttraumatic stress disorder. Overgeneralization is
hypothetically attributed to "dysregulation of
prefrontal-amygdalo-hippocampal circuitry" (Banich, et al., 2010, p.
21).One of the earliest studies about fear generalization in humans was
conducted by Watson and Raynor (1920): the Little Albert experiment. In
their study, an infant known as Little Albert was exposed to various
kinds of animals, none of which elicited a fear response from Little
Albert. However, after 7 pairings of a white rat and the sound of a
hammer clanging against a steel bar (which did elicit a fear response),
the 11-month old child began to cry and try to get away from the white
rat even without the loud noise. Months later, additional trials showed
that Little Albert had generalized his fear response to things that were
similar to the white rat, including a dog, a rabbit, and a fur
coat.Brain regions involved in fear generalization include the amygdala
and the hippocampus. The hippocampus seems to be more involved in the
development of context fear generalization (developing a generalized
fear for a specific environment) than stimulus fear generalization (such
as Little Albert's acquisition of a fear response to white, furry
objects). The amygdala, which is associated with all types of emotional
responses, is fundamental in developing a classically conditioned fear
response to either a stimulus or the context in which it is found.
Generalization in machine learning See also Chunking (psychology) ==
References ==
