A goof is a mistake. The term is also used in a number of specific
senses: in cinema, it is an error or oversight during production that is
visible in the released version of the film. Etymology Several origins
have been proposed for the word. According to Merriam-Webster, \"goof\"
is likely a variation of \"goff\" in an English dialect, meaning
simpleton. Some say the word may come from an identically pronounced
Hebrew word meaning \"body\", some even say it was just a mistake that
happened while typing the word \"good\", hence the word \"goof\" is also
known as another word for mistake See the etymological explanation of
Hessu Hopo, \'Goofy\' in Finnish language. The Spanish word gofio refers
to the balls of toasted flour and salt eaten by the original inhabitants
of the Canary Islands. In Latin America (esp. Cuba) the word
\"comegofio\" (lit. \"gofio-eater\") came to refer to anyone from the
Canaries, stereotyped as primitive or stupid. Cinema In filmmaking, a
goof is a mistake made during film production that finds its way into
the final released picture. Depending upon the film and the actual
scene, the goof may have different effects: a loss in realism, an
annoyance, or it could just be funny. It is often a type of continuity
error. Goofs are also known as \"bloopers\" or \"mistakes\". There are
several types of goofs, for example: Somebody or something from the film
crew is in the picture that wasn\'t planned (e.g., camera and cameraman
is reflected in a mirror, or the microphone is visible, a rope pushing a
character over is visible, a hook pulling a character up in the air is
visible). Chronological or continuity errors (e.g. a cigarette getting
longer with the next scene, a cup or glass gaining in volume in the next
scene, damage to a building that disappears, or moved props) Historical
inaccuracies and anachronisms (e.g., an HDTV set in a film set in the
1970s, radio tower in a cowboy movie). Geographic: an object or landmark
reveals the scene was filmed in a different city than the city it is
set. This is very common in Hollywood films that are shot in Canada.
Problems in audio or soundtrack (e.g. a dog barking before its mouth
moves, a person\'s lips carry on moving after they have finished
speaking). Intertitles displaying wrong words (e.g. a character called
\"John\" may have his name misspelled Jhon in the subtitles by
accident). Editing errors, where dialog or events in one scene refer to
material that occurred in a prior scene in the screenplay, but which was
deleted in the final cut of the film.Goofs can be found in a large
number of films and episodes, even in very expensive productions. The
1977 film Star Wars Episode IV: A New Hope, for example, has been
counted to have 200 goofs in it, ranging from disappearing props to a
storm trooper hitting his head on an opening door. See also Gaffe
Goofball comedy References External links Insultingly Stupid Movie
Physics
