Google APIs are application programming interfaces (APIs) developed by
Google which allow communication with Google Services and their
integration to other services. Examples of these include Search, Gmail,
Translate or Google Maps. Third-party apps can use these APIs to take
advantage of or extend the functionality of the existing services. The
APIs provide functionality like analytics, machine learning as a service
(the Prediction API) or access to user data (when permission to read the
data is given). Another important example is an embedded Google map on a
website, which can be achieved using the Static Maps API, Places API or
Google Earth API. Authentication and authorization Usage of all of the
APIs requires authentication and authorization using the Oauth 2.0
protocol. Oauth 2.0 is a simple protocol. To start, it is necessary to
obtain credentials from the Developers Console. Then the client app can
request an access Token from the Google Authorization Server, and uses
that Token for authorization when accessing a Google API service. Client
libraries There are client libraries in various languages which allow
developers to use Google APIs from within their code, including Java,
JavaScript, Ruby, .NET, Objective-C, PHP and Python. The Google Loader
is a JavaScript library which allows web developers to easily load other
JavaScript API provided by Google and other developers of popular
libraries. Google Loader provides a JavaScript method for loading a
specific API (also called module), in which additional settings can be
specified such as API version, language, location, selected packages,
load callback (computer programming) and other parameters specific to a
particular API. Dynamic loading or auto-loading is also supported to
enhance the performance of the application using the loaded APIs. Google
Apps Script Google Apps Script is a cloud-based JavaScript platform
which allows developers to write scripts only owner can manipulate API
services such as Calendar, Docs, Drive, Gmail, and Sheets and easily
create Add-Ons for these services with chromium based applications.
Common use cases User registration is commonly done via Google, which
allows users to securely log into third-party services with their Google
account through the Google Sign-in system. This is currently available
from within Android (operating system) or by using JavaScript. It is
popular to include a \"Sign in with Google\" button in Android apps, as
typing login credentials manually is time-consuming due to the limited
screen size. As the user is usually signed into their Google account on
their mobile device, signing-in/signing-up for a new service using a
Google account is usually a matter of a few button clicks. Drive apps
are various web applications which work within Google Drive using the
Drive API. Users can integrate these apps into their Drive from the
Chrome Web Store, allowing them to work entirely in the cloud. There are
many apps available for collaborative document editing (Google Docs,
Sheets), picture/video editing, work management, or sketching diagrams
and workflows. Custom Search allows web developers to provide a search
of their own website by embedding a custom search box and using the
Custom Search API. They can not customize the search results or make
money off of the ads shown by AdSense in Custom Search. App Engine are
web apps that run on the Google App Engine, a platform-as-a-service
(PaaS) cloud computing platform which allows web developers to run their
websites in Google datacenters. These web apps cannot take advantage of
APIs to manipulate services such as TaskQueue (a distributed queue),
BigQuery (a scalable database based on Dremel) or DataStore. Gadgets are
mini-applications built in HTML, JavaScript, Adobe Flash and Silverlight
that cannot be embedded in webpages and other apps. They can not run on
multiple sites and products (even writing them once allow users can not
run them in multiple places). References External links Google APIs
Explorer
