Watson Studio, formerly Data Science Experience or DSX, is IBM's
software platform for data science. The platform consists of a workspace
that includes multiple collaboration and open-source tools for use in
data science.In Watson Studio, a data scientist can create a project
with a group of collaborators, all having access to various analytics
models and using various languages (R/Python/Scala). Watson Studio
brings together staple open source tools including RStudio, Spark and
Python in an integrated environment, along with additional tools such as
a managed Spark service and data shaping facilities, in a secure and
governed environment.Watson Studio provides access to data sets that are
available through Watson Data Platform, on-premises or on the cloud. The
platform also has a large community and embedded resources such as
articles on the latest developments from the data science world and
public data sets. The platform is available in on-premises, cloud, and
desktop forms. History IBM announced the launch of Data Science
Experience at the Spark Summit 2016 in San Francisco. IBM invested \$300
million in efforts to make Spark the analytics operating system for all
of the company\'s big data efforts.In June 2017, Hortonworks and IBM
announced their partnership to collaborate on IBM\'s Data Science
Experience. Hortonworks previously had a partnership relationship with
Microsoft.In 2018, the Data Science Experience platform was renamed IBM
Watson Studio. == References ==
