Jerome Harold Friedman (born December 29, 1939) is an American
statistician, consultant and Professor of Statistics at Stanford
University, known for his contributions in the field of statistics and
data mining. Biography Friedman studied at Chico State College for two
years before transferring to the University of California, Berkeley in
1959, where he received his AB in Physics in 1962, and his PhD in High
Energy Particle Physics in 1967.In 1968 he started his academic career
as research physicist at the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. In
1972 he started at Stanford University as leader of the Computation
Research Group at the Stanford Linear Accelerator Center, where he would
participate until 2003. In the year 1976--77 he was a visiting scientist
at CERN in Geneva. From 1981 to 1984 he was visiting professor at the
University of California, Berkeley. In 1982 he was appointed Professor
of Statistics at Stanford University.In 1984 he was elected as a Fellow
of the American Statistical Association. In 2002 he was awarded the
SIGKDD Innovation Award by the Association for Computing Machinery
(ACM). In 2010 he was elected as a member of the National Academy of
Sciences (Applied mathematical sciences). Publications Friedman has
authored and co-authored many publications in the field of data-mining
including \"nearest neighbor classification, logistical regressions, and
high dimensional data analysis. His primary research interest is in the
area of machine learning.\" A selection: Friedman, Jerome H. & Tukey,
John W. (1974). \"A projection pursuit algorithm for exploratory data
analysis\". IEEE Transactions on Computers. 23 (9): 881--890.
doi:10.1109/T-C.1974.224051. OSTI 1442925. S2CID 7997450. Friedman,
Jerome H. & Stuetzle, Werner (1981). \"Projection pursuit regression\".
Journal of the American Statistical Association. 76 (376): 817--823.
doi:10.1080/01621459.1981.10477729. OSTI 1445517. Friedman, Jerome H.
(1991). \"Multivariate adaptive regression splines\". Annals of
Statistics. 19 (1): 1--67. CiteSeerX 10.1.1.382.970.
doi:10.1214/aos/1176347963. JSTOR 2241837. Friedman, Jerome H. (2001).
\"Greedy function approximation: a gradient boosting machine\". Annals
of Statistics. 29 (5): 1189--1232. doi:10.1214/aos/1013203451. JSTOR
2699986. See also Gradient boosting LogitBoost Multivariate adaptive
regression splines Projection pursuit regression References External
links Jerome H. Friedman Professor of Statistics
https://jerryfriedman.su.domains/ Homepage
