KNIME (), the Konstanz Information Miner, is a free and open-source data
analytics, reporting and integration platform. KNIME integrates various
components for machine learning and data mining through its modular data
pipelining \"Building Blocks of Analytics\" concept. A graphical user
interface and use of JDBC allows assembly of nodes blending different
data sources, including preprocessing (ETL: Extraction, Transformation,
Loading), for modeling, data analysis and visualization without, or with
only minimal, programming. Since 2006, KNIME has been used in
pharmaceutical research, it also used in other areas such as CRM
customer data analysis, business intelligence, text mining and financial
data analysis. Recently attempts were made to use KNIME as robotic
process automation (RPA) tool.KNIME\'s headquarters are based in Zurich,
with additional offices in Konstanz, Berlin, and Austin (USA). History
The Development of KNIME was started January 2004 by a team of software
engineers at University of Konstanz as a proprietary product. The
original developer team headed by Michael Berthold came from a company
in Silicon Valley providing software for the pharmaceutical industry.
The initial goal was to create a modular, highly scalable and open data
processing platform that allowed for the easy integration of different
data loading, processing, transformation, analysis and visual
exploration modules without the focus on any particular application
area. The platform was intended to be a collaboration and research
platform and also serve as an integration platform for various other
data analysis projects.In 2006 the first version of KNIME was released
and several pharmaceutical companies started using KNIME and a number of
life science software vendors began integrating their tools into KNIME.
Later that year, after an article in the German magazine c\'t, users
from a number of other areas joined ship. As of 2012, KNIME is in use by
over 15,000 actual users (i.e. not counting downloads but users
regularly retrieving updates when they become available) not only in the
life sciences and also at banks, publishers, car manufacturer, telcos,
consulting firms, and various other industries as well as at a large
number of research groups worldwide. Latest updates to KNIME Server and
KNIME Big Data Extensions, provide support for Apache Spark 2.3, Parquet
and HDFS-type storage. For the sixth year in a row, KNIME has been
placed as a leader for Data Science and Machine Learning Platforms in
Gartner\'s Magic Quadrant. Internals KNIME allows users to visually
create data flows (or pipelines), selectively execute some or all
analysis steps, and later inspect the results, models, using interactive
widgets and views. KNIME is written in Java and based on Eclipse. It
makes use of extension mechanism to add plugins providing additional
functionality. The core version already includes hundreds of modules for
data integration (file I/O, database nodes supporting all common
database management systems through JDBC or native connectors: SQLite,
MS-Access, SQL Server, MySQL, Oracle, PostgreSQL, Vertica and H2), data
transformation (filter, converter, splitter, combiner, joiner) as well
as the commonly used methods of statistics, data mining, analysis and
text analytics. Visualization supports with the free Report Designer
extension. KNIME workflows can be used as data sets to create report
templates that can be exported to document formats such as doc, ppt,
xls, pdf and others. Other capabilities of KNIME are: KNIMEs
core-architecture allows processing of large data volumes that are only
limited by the available hard disk space (not limited to the available
RAM). E.g. KNIME allows analysis of 300 million customer addresses, 20
million cell images and 10 million molecular structures. Additional
plugins allows the integration of methods for text mining, Image mining,
as well as time series analysis and network. KNIME integrates various
other open-source projects, e.g. machine learning algorithms from Weka,
H2O.ai, Keras, Spark, the R project and LIBSVM; as well as plotly,
JFreeChart, ImageJ, and the Chemistry Development Kit.KNIME is
implemented in Java nevertheless it allows for wrappers calling other
code in addition to providing nodes that allow to run Java, Python, R,
Ruby and other code fragments. License As of version 2.1, KNIME is
released under GPLv3 with an exception that allows others to use the
well defined node API to add proprietary extensions. This allows also
commercial SW vendors to add wrappers calling their tools from KNIME.
KNIME Courses Even though Data Science assumes programming skills, KNIME
allows Data Analysts practice Data Science without one. For study KNIME
provides two lines of online courses based on Data Wrangling and Data
Science lines. See also Weka -- machine-learning algorithms that can be
integrated in KNIME ELKI -- data mining framework with many clustering
algorithms Keras - neural network library Orange - an open-source data
visualization, machine learning and data mining toolkit with a similar
visual programming front-end List of free and open-source software
packages References External links KNIME Homepage KNIME Hub - Official
community plattform to search and find nodes, components, workflows and
collaborate on new solutions Nodepit - KNIME node collection supporting
versioning and node installation
