LIONsolver is an integrated software for data mining, business
intelligence, analytics, and modeling and reactive business intelligence
approach. A non-profit version is also available as LIONoso. LIONsolver
is used to build models, visualize them, and improve business and
engineering processes. It is a tool for decision making based on data
and quantitative model and it can be connected to most databases and
external programs. The software is fully integrated with the Grapheur
business intelligence and intended for more advanced users. Overview
LIONsolver originates from research principles in Reactive Search
Optimization advocating the use of self-tuning schemes acting while a
software system is running. Learning and Intelligent OptimizatioN refers
to the integration of online machine learning schemes into the
optimization software, so that it becomes capable of learning from its
previous runs and from human feedback. A related approach is that of
Programming by Optimization, which provides a direct way of defining
design spaces involving Reactive Search Optimization, and of Autonomous
Search advocating adapting problem-solving algorithms. Version 2.0 of
the software was released on Oct 1, 2011, covering also the Unix and Mac
OS X operating systems in addition to Windows. The modeling components
include neural networks, polynomials, locally weighted Bayesian
regression, k-means clustering, and self-organizing maps. A free
academic license for non-commercial use and class use is available. The
software architecture of LIONsolver permits interactive multi-objective
optimization, with a user interface for visualizing the results and
facilitating the solution analysis and decision making process. The
architecture allows for problem-specific extensions, and it is
applicable as a post-processing tool for all optimization schemes with a
number of different potential solutions. When the architecture is
tightly coupled to a specific problem-solving or optimization method,
effective interactive schemes where the final decision maker is in the
loop can be developed.On Apr 24, 2013 LIONsolver received the first
prize of the Michael J. Fox Foundation -- Kaggle Parkinson\'s Data
Challenge, a contest leveraging \"the wisdom of the crowd\" to benefit
people with Parkinson\'s disease. See also Multi-objective optimization
References External links LIONsolver official non-profit site
