These datasets are applied for machine learning (ML) research and have
been cited in peer-reviewed academic journals. Datasets are an integral
part of the field of machine learning. Major advances in this field can
result from advances in learning algorithms (such as deep learning),
computer hardware, and, less-intuitively, the availability of
high-quality training datasets. High-quality labeled training datasets
for supervised and semi-supervised machine learning algorithms are
usually difficult and expensive to produce because of the large amount
of time needed to label the data. Although they do not need to be
labeled, high-quality datasets for unsupervised learning can also be
difficult and costly to produce.Many organizations including governments
publish and share their datasets . The datasets are classified, based on
the licenses, as Open data and Non-Open data. The datasets from various
governmental-bodies are presented in List of open government data sites.
The datasets are ported on open data portals. They are made available
for searching, depositing and accessing through interfaces like Open
API. The datasets are made available as various sorted types and
subtypes. List of sorting used for Datasets The data portal is
classified based on its type of license. The open source license based
data portals are known as open data portals which are used by many
government organizations and academic institutions. List of Open Data
Portals List of portals suitable for multiple types of ML applications
The data portal sometimes lists a wide variety of subtypes of datasets
pertaining to many machine learning applications. List of portals
suitable for a specific subtype of ML application The data portals which
are suitable for a specific subtype of machine learning application are
listed in the subsequent sections. Image data These datasets consist
primarily of images or videos for tasks such as object detection, facial
recognition, and multi-label classification. Facial recognition In
computer vision, face images have been used extensively to develop
facial recognition systems, face detection, and many other projects that
use images of faces. Action recognition Object detection and recognition
Handwriting and character recognition Aerial images Underwater images
Other images Text data These datasets consist primarily of text for
tasks such as natural language processing, sentiment analysis,
translation, and cluster analysis. Reviews News articles Messages
Twitter and tweets Dialogues Legal Other text Sound data These datasets
consist of sounds and sound features used for tasks such as speech
recognition and speech synthesis. Speech Music Other sounds Signal data
Datasets containing electric signal information requiring some sort of
signal processing for further analysis. Electrical Motion-tracking Other
signals Physical data Datasets from physical systems. High-energy
physics Systems Astronomy Earth science Other physical Biological data
Datasets from biological systems. Human Animal Fungi Plant Microbe Drug
Discovery Anomaly data Question Answering data This section includes
datasets that deals with structured data. Dialog or Instruction Prompted
data This section includes datasets that \... Cybersecurity Climate and
Sustainability Code data Multivariate Data Financial Weather Census
Transit Internet Games Other multivariate Curated repositories of
datasets As datasets come in myriad formats and can sometimes be
difficult to use, there has been considerable work put into curating and
standardizing the format of datasets to make them easier to use for
machine learning research. OpenML: Web platform with Python, R, Java,
and other APIs for downloading hundreds of machine learning datasets,
evaluating algorithms on datasets, and benchmarking algorithm
performance against dozens of other algorithms. PMLB: A large, curated
repository of benchmark datasets for evaluating supervised machine
learning algorithms. Provides classification and regression datasets in
a standardized format that are accessible through a Python API. Metatext
NLP: https://metatext.io/datasets web repository maintained by
community, containing nearly 1000 benchmark datasets, and counting.
Provides many tasks from classification to QA, and various languages
from English, Portuguese to Arabic. Appen: Off The Shelf and Open Source
Datasets hosted and maintained by the company. These biological, image,
physical, question answering, signal, sound, text, and video resources
number over 250 and can be applied to over 25 different use cases. See
also Comparison of deep learning software List of manual image
annotation tools List of biological databases == References ==
