Mehryar Mohri is a Professor and theoretical computer scientist at the
Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences. He is also a Research
Director at Google Research where he heads the Learning Theory team.
Career Prior to joining the Courant Institute, Mohri was a Research
Department Head and later Technology Leader at AT&T Bell Labs, where he
was a Member of the Technical Staff for about ten years. Mohri has also
taught as an Assistant Professor at the University of Paris 7
(1992-1993) and Ecole Polytechnique (1992-1994). Research Mohri\'s main
area of research is machine learning, in particular learning theory. He
is also an expert in automata theory and algorithms. He is the author of
several core algorithms that have served as the foundation for the
design of many deployed speech recognition and natural language
processing systems. Publications Mohri is the author of the reference
book Foundations of Machine Learning used as a textbook in many
graduate-level machine learning courses. Mohri is also a member of the
Lothaire group of mathematicians with the pseudonym M. Lothaire and
contributed to the book on Applied Combinatorics on Words. He is the
author of more than 250 conference and journal publications.
Organizational affiliations Mohri is currently the President of the
Association for Algorithmic Learning Theory (AALT) and the Steering
Committee Chair for the ALT conference. He is also Editorial Board
member of Machine Learning and TheoretiCS, Action Editor of the Journal
of Machine Learning Research (JMLR) and a member of the advisory board
for the Journal of Automata, Languages and Combinatorics. == References
==
