The memtransistor is an experimental multi-terminal passive electronic
component that might be used in the construction of artificial neural
networks. It is a combination of the memristor and transistor
technology. This technology is different from the 1T-1R approach since
the devices are merged into one single entity. Multiple memristers can
be embedded with a single transistor, enabling it to more accurately
model a neuron with its multiple synaptic connections. A neural network
produced from these would provide hardware-based artificial intelligence
with a good foundation. Applications These types of devices would allow
for a synapse model that could realise a learning rule, by which the
synaptic efficacy is altered by voltages applied to the terminals of the
device. An example of such a learning rule is
spike-timing-dependant-plasticty by which the weight of the synapse, in
this case the conductivity, could be modulated based on the timing of
pre and post synaptic spikes arriving at each terminal. The advantage of
this approach over two terminal memristive devices is that read and
write protocols have the possibility to occur simultaneously and
distinctly. Implementations Researchers at Northwestern University have
fabricated a seven-terminal device fabricated on molybdenum disulfide
(MoS2). One terminal controls the current between the other six. It has
been shown that the I_D / V_D characteristics of the transistor can be
modified even after fabrication. Subsequently, designs which would
originally require multiple (selectable) transistors can be implemented
with a single configurable transistor. == References ==
