Michael Irwin Jordan (born February 25, 1956) is an American scientist,
professor at the University of California, Berkeley and researcher in
machine learning, statistics, and artificial intelligence.Jordan was
elected a member of the National Academy of Engineering in 2010 for
contributions to the foundations and applications of machine learning.
He is one of the leading figures in machine learning, and in 2016
Science reported him as the world\'s most influential computer
scientist.In 2022, Jordan won the inaugural WLA Prize in Computer
Science or Mathematics, \"for fundamental contributions to the
foundations of machine learning and its application.\" Education Jordan
received his BS magna cum laude in Psychology in 1978 from the Louisiana
State University, his MS in Mathematics in 1980 from Arizona State
University and his PhD in Cognitive Science in 1985 from the University
of California, San Diego. At the University of California, San Diego,
Jordan was a student of David Rumelhart and a member of the Parallel
Distributed Processing (PDP) Group in the 1980s. Career and research
Jordan is the Pehong Chen Distinguished Professor at the University of
California, Berkeley, where his appointment is split across EECS and
Statistics. He was a professor at the Department of Brain and Cognitive
Sciences at MIT from 1988 to 1998.In the 1980s Jordan started developing
recurrent neural networks as a cognitive model. In recent years, his
work is less driven from a cognitive perspective and more from the
background of traditional statistics. Jordan popularised Bayesian
networks in the machine learning community and is known for pointing out
links between machine learning and statistics. He was also prominent in
the formalisation of variational methods for approximate inference and
the popularisation of the expectation--maximization algorithm in machine
learning. Resignation from Machine Learning In 2001, Jordan and others
resigned from the editorial board of the journal Machine Learning. In a
public letter, they argued for less restrictive access and pledged
support for a new open access journal, the Journal of Machine Learning
Research, which was created by Leslie Kaelbling to support the evolution
of the field of machine learning. Honors and awards Jordan has received
numerous awards, including a best student paper award (with X. Nguyen
and M. Wainwright) at the International Conference on Machine Learning
(ICML 2004), a best paper award (with R. Jacobs) at the American Control
Conference (ACC 1991), the ACM-AAAI Allen Newell Award, the IEEE Neural
Networks Pioneer Award, and an NSF Presidential Young Investigator
Award. In 2002 he was named an AAAI Fellow \"for significant
contributions to reasoning under uncertainty, machine learning, and
human motor control.\" In 2004 he was named an IMS Fellow \"for
contributions to graphical models and machine learning.\" In 2005 he was
named an IEEE Fellow \"for contributions to probabilistic graphical
models and neural information processing systems.\" In 2007 he was named
an ASA Fellow. In 2010 he was named a Cognitive Science Society Fellow
and named an ACM Fellow \"for contributions to the theory and
application of machine learning.\" In 2012 he was named a SIAM Fellow
\"for contributions to machine learning, in particular variational
approaches to statistical inference.\" In 2014 he was named an
International Society for Bayesian Analysis Fellow \"for his outstanding
research contributions at the interface of statistics, computer sciences
and probability, for his leading role in promoting Bayesian methods in
machine learning, engineering and other fields, and for his extensive
service to ISBA in many roles.\"Jordan is a member of the National
Academy of Sciences, a member of the National Academy of Engineering and
a member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences.He has been named
a Neyman Lecturer and a Medallion Lecturer by the Institute of
Mathematical Statistics. He received the David E. Rumelhart Prize in
2015 and the ACM/AAAI Allen Newell Award in 2009. He also won 2020 IEEE
John von Neumann Medal. In 2016, Jordan was identified as the \"most
influential computer scientist\", based on an analysis of the published
literature by the Semantic Scholar project.In 2019, Jordan argued that
the artificial intelligence revolution hasn\'t happened yet and that the
AI revolution required a blending of computer science with statistics.In
2022, Jordan was awarded the inaugural WLA Prize by non-governmental and
non-profit international organization World Laureates Association, for
fundamental contributions to the foundations of machine learning and its
application. == References ==
