Microsoft Azure, often referred to as Azure (/ˈæʒər, ˈeɪʒər/ AZH-ər,
AY-zhər, UK also /ˈæzjʊər, ˈeɪzjʊər/ AZ-ure, AY-zure), is a cloud
computing platform run by Microsoft, which offers access, management,
and development of applications and services through global data
centers. It provides a range of capabilities, including software as a
service (SaaS), platform as a service (PaaS), and infrastructure as a
service (IaaS). Microsoft Azure supports many programming languages,
tools, and frameworks, including Microsoft-specific and third-party
software and systems. Microsoft\'s cloud computing platform, Azure, was
introduced at the Professional Developers Conference (PDC) in October
2008 under the codename \"Project Red Dog\". It was officially launched
as Windows Azure in February 2010 and later renamed Microsoft Azure on
March 25, 2014. Services Microsoft Azure uses large-scale virtualization
at Microsoft data centers worldwide and it offers more than 600
services. Computer services Virtual machines, infrastructure as a
service (IaaS) allowing users to launch general-purpose Microsoft
Windows and x virtual machines, software as a service (Saas) as well as
preconfigured machine images for popular software packages.Starting in
2022, VMs are powered by Ampere Cloud-native processors. Most users run
Linux on Azure, some of the many Linux distributions offered, including
Microsoft\'s own Linux-based Azure Sphere. App services, platform as a
service (PaaS) environment letting developers easily publish and manage
websites. Websites, Azure Web Sites allows developers to build sites
using ASP.NET, PHP, Node.js, Java, or Python and can be deployed using
FTP, Git, Mercurial, Team Foundation Server or uploaded through the user
portal. This feature was announced in preview form in June 2012 at the
Meet Microsoft Azure event. Customers can create websites in PHP,
ASP.NET, Node.js, or Python, or select from several open source
applications from a gallery to deploy. This comprises one aspect of the
platform as a service (PaaS) offerings for the Microsoft Azure Platform.
It was renamed Web Apps in April 2015. WebJobs, applications that can be
deployed to an App Service environment to implement background
processing that can be invoked on a schedule, on demand, or run
continuously. The Blob, Table and Queue services can be used to
communicate between WebApps, XYZ, iOS Software and WebJobs and to
provide state. Azure Kubernetes Service (AKS) allows you to quickly
deploy a production ready kubernetes cluster in Azure. Azure is
responsible for managing the control plane and customers get the
flexibility to choose/scale the data place (kubernetes worker nodes).
Identity Azure Active Directory Connect is used to synchronize
on-premises directories and enable SSO (Single Sign On). Azure Active
Directory B2C allows the use of consumer identity and access management
in the cloud. Azure Active Directory Domain Services is used to join
Azure virtual machines to a domain without domain controllers. Azure
information protection can be used to protect sensitive information.
Azure Active Directory External Identities are set of capabilities which
allow organizations to collaborate with external users including
customers and partners. Mobile services Mobile Engagement collects
real-time analytics that highlight users' behavior. It also provides
push notifications to mobile devices. HockeyApp can be used to develop,
distribute, and beta-test mobile apps. Storage services Storage Services
provides REST and SDK APIs for storing and accessing data on the cloud.
Table Service lets programs store structured text in partitioned
collections of entities that are accessed by partition key and primary
key. Azure Table Service is a NoSQL non-relational database. Blob
Service allows programs to store unstructured text and binary data as
blobs that can be accessed by an HTTP(S) path. Blob service also
provides security mechanisms to control access to data. Queue Service
lets programs communicate asynchronously by message using queues. File
Service allows storing and access of data on the cloud using the REST
APIs or the SMB protocol. Communication services Azure Communication
Services offers an SDK for creating web and mobile communications
applications that include SMS, video calling, VOIP and PSTN calling, and
web based chat. Data management Azure Data Explorer provides big data
analytics and data-exploration capabilities Azure Search provides text
search and a subset of OData\'s structured filters using REST or SDK
APIs. Cosmos DB is a NoSQL database service that implements a subset of
the SQL SELECT statement on JSON documents. Azure Cache for Redis is a
managed implementation of Redis. StorSimple manages storage tasks
between on-premises devices and cloud storage. Azure SQL Database works
to create, scale and extend applications into the cloud using Microsoft
SQL Server technology. It also integrates with Active Directory,
Microsoft System Center and Hadoop. Azure Synapse Analytics is a fully
managed cloud data warehouse. Azure Data Factory, is a data integration
service that allows creation of data-driven workflows in the cloud for
orchestrating and automating data movement and data transformation.
Azure Data Lake is a scalable data storage and analytic service for big
data analytics workloads that require developers to run massively
parallel queries. Azure HDInsight is a big data relevant service, that
deploys Hortonworks Hadoop on Microsoft Azure, and supports the creation
of Hadoop clusters using Linux with Ubuntu. Azure Stream Analytics is a
Serverless scalable event processing engine that enables users to
develop and run real-time analytics on multiple streams of data from
sources such as devices, sensors, web sites, social media, and other
applications. Messaging The Microsoft Azure Service Bus allows
applications running on Azure premises or off-premises devices to
communicate with Azure. This helps to build scalable and reliable
applications in a service-oriented architecture (SOA). The Azure service
bus supports four different types of communication mechanisms: Event
Hubs, which provide event and telemetry ingress to the cloud at massive
scale, with low latency and high reliability. For example, an event hub
can be used to track data from cell phones such as coordinating with a
GPS in real time. Queues, which allow one-directional communication. A
sender application would send the message to the service bus queue, and
a receiver would read from the queue. Though there can be multiple
readers for the queue only one would process a single message. Topics,
which provide one-directional communication using a subscriber pattern.
It is similar to a queue, however, each subscriber will receive a copy
of the message sent to a Topic. Optionally the subscriber can filter out
messages based on specific criteria defined by the subscriber. Relays,
which provide bi-directional communication. Unlike queues and topics, a
relay doesn\'t store in-flight messages in its own memory. Instead, it
just passes them on to the destination application. Media services A
PaaS offering that can be used for encoding, content protection,
streaming, or analytics. CDN Azure has a worldwide content delivery
network (CDN) designed to efficiently deliver audio, video,
applications, images, and other static files. It improves the
performance of websites by caching static files closer to users based on
their geographic location. Users can manage the network using a
REST-based HTTP API.Azure has 118 point of presence locations, across
100 cities, worldwide (also known as Edge locations) as of January 2023.
Developer Application Insights Azure DevOps Management With Azure
Automation, users can easily automate repetitive and time-consuming
tasks, often prone to cloud or enterprise setting errors. They can
accomplish it using runbooks or desired state configurations for process
automation. Microsoft SMA Azure AI Microsoft Azure Machine Learning
(Azure ML) provides tools and ML frameworks for developers to create
their own machine learning and artificial intelligence (AI) services.
Azure Cognitive Services by Microsoft comprise prebuilt APIs, SDKs, and
services developers can customize. These services encompass perceptual
and cognitive intelligence features such as speech recognition, speaker
recognition, neural speech synthesis, face recognition, computer vision,
OCR/form understanding, natural language processing, machine
translation, and business decision services. Many AI characteristics in
Microsoft\'s products and services, namely Bing, Office, Teams, Xbox,
and Windows, are driven by Azure Cognitive Services. Azure Blockchain
Workbench Through Azure Blockchain Workbench, Microsoft is providing the
required infrastructure to set up a consortium network in multiple
topologies using a variety of consensus mechanisms. Microsoft provides
integration from these blockchain platforms to other Microsoft services
to streamline the development of distributed applications. Microsoft
supports many general-purpose blockchains including Ethereum and
Hyperledger Fabric and purpose-built blockchains like Corda. Functions
Azure functions are used in serverless computing architectures where
subscribers can execute code as an event driven Function-as-a-Service
(FaaS) without managing the underlying server resources. Customers using
Azure functions are billed based on per-second resource consumption and
executions. Internet of Things (IoT) Azure IoT Hub lets you connect,
monitor, and manage billions of IoT assets. On February 4, 2016,
Microsoft announced the General Availability of the Azure IoT Hub
service. Azure IoT Edge is a fully managed service built on IoT Hub that
allows for cloud intelligence deployed locally on IoT edge devices.
Azure IoT Central is a fully managed SaaS app that makes it easy to
connect, monitor, and manage IoT assets at scale. On December 5, 2017,
Microsoft announced the Public Preview of Azure IoT Central; its Azure
IoT SaaS service. On October 4, 2017, Microsoft began shipping GA
versions of the official Microsoft Azure IoT Developer Kit (DevKit)
board; manufactured by MXChip. On April 16, 2018, Microsoft announced
the launch of the Azure Sphere, an end-to-end IoT product that focuses
on microcontroller-based devices and uses Linux. On June 27, 2018,
Microsoft launched Azure IoT Edge, used to run Azure services and
artificial intelligence on IoT devices. On November 20, 2018, Microsoft
launched the Open Enclave SDK for cross-platform systems such as ARM
TrustZone and Intel SGX. Azure Orbital Launched in September 2020, Azure
Orbital lets private industries and government agencies process
satellite data quickly by connecting directly to cloud computing
networks. Mobile cloud computing ground stations are also available to
provide connectivity to remote locations without ground infrastructure.
Third-party satellite systems, like SpaceX\'s Starlink and SES\' O3b
constellation, can be employed.SES plans to use Microsoft\'s data
centers to provide cloud connectivity to remote areas through its
next-generation O3b mPOWER MEO satellites alongside Microsoft\'s data
centers. The company will deploy satellite control and uplink ground
stations to achieve this. SES launched the first two O3b mPOWER
satellites in December 2022; nine more are scheduled between 2023 and
2024. The service should begin in Q3 2023.According to Microsoft, using
satellites to connect to cloud data centers may provide faster speeds
than complex fiber routes. For online media, entertainment, or gaming
activities, connecting from home to the cloud can involve longer routes
with multiple hops. Through their experiments with Xbox Cloud, Microsoft
has discovered that satellite connection is faster than terrestrial
networks in certain parts of the world (including specific locations in
the USA). Regional expansion As of 2018, Azure was available in 54
regions, and Microsoft was the first primary cloud provider to establish
facilities in Africa, with two regions in South Africa. Azure
geographies consist of multiple Azure Regions, like \"North Europe\"
(located in Dublin, Ireland) and \"West Europe\" (located in Amsterdam,
Netherlands). Each Azure Region is paired with another region within the
same geography, forming a regional pair. For instance, the locations of
Dublin and Amsterdam create a regional couple. Middle East cloud data
centers On June 19th, 2019, Microsoft announced the launch of two new
cloud regions in the United Arab Emirates -- Microsoft\'s first in the
Middle East. Microsoft\'s management stated that these new data centers
would empower customers and partners to embrace the benefits of the
Fourth Industrial Revolution and achieve more using cloud technologies.
Research partnerships Microsoft has partners that sell its products. In
August 2018, Toyota Tsusho began a partnership with Microsoft to create
fish farming tools using the Microsoft Azure application suite for IoT
technologies related to water management. Developed in part by
researchers from Kindai University, the water pump mechanisms use
artificial intelligence to count the number of fish on a conveyor belt,
analyze the number of fish, and deduce the effectiveness of water flow
from the data the fish provide. The specific computer programs used in
the process fall under the Azure Machine Learning and the Azure IoT Hub
platforms. Design Microsoft Azure utilizes a specialized operating
system with the same name to power its \"fabric layer\". This cluster is
hosted at Microsoft\'s data centers and is responsible for managing
computing and storage resources and allocating them to applications
running on the Microsoft Azure platform. It\'s a \"cloud layer\" built
upon various Windows Server systems, including the customized Microsoft
Azure Hypervisor, which is based on Windows Server 2008 and enables the
virtualization of services.The Microsoft Azure Fabric Controller
maintains the scalability and dependability of services and environments
in the data center. It prevents failure in server malfunction and
manages users\' web applications, including memory allocation and load
balancing.Azure provides an API built on REST, HTTP, and XML that allows
a developer to interact with the services offered by Microsoft Azure.
Microsoft also provides a client-side managed class library that
encapsulates the functions of interacting with the services. It also
integrates with Microsoft Visual Studio, Git, and Eclipse.Users can
manage Azure services in multiple ways, one of which is through the
Web-based Azure Portal, which became generally available in December
2015. Apart from accessing services via API, users can browse active
resources, adjust settings, launch new resources, and view primary
monitoring data of functional virtual machines and services using the
portal. Deployment models Regarding cloud resources, Microsoft Azure
offers two deployment models: the \"classic\" model and the Azure
Resource Manager. In the classic model, each resource, like a virtual
machine or SQL database, had to be managed separately. But in 2014,
Azure introduced the Azure Resource Manager, which allows users to group
related services. This update makes it easier and more efficient to
deploy, manage, and monitor resources that work closely together. The
classic model will eventually be phased out. History and timeline In
2005, Microsoft took over Groove Networks, and Bill Gates made Groove\'s
founder Ray Ozzie one of his 5 direct reports as one of 3 chief
technology officers. Ozzie met with Amitabh Srivastava, which let
Srivastava change course. They convinced Dave Cutler to postpone his
retirement and their teams developed a cloud operating system. October
2008 (PDC LA) -- Announced the Windows Azure Platform. March 2009 --
Announced SQL Azure Relational Database. November 2009 -- Updated
Windows Azure CTP, Enabled full trust, PHP, Java, CDN CTP and more.
February 1, 2010 -- Windows Azure Platform commercially available. June
2010 -- Windows Azure Update, .NET Framework 4, OS Versioning, CDN, SQL
Azure Update. October 2010 (PDC) -- Platform enhancements, Windows Azure
Connect, improved Dev / IT Pro Experience. December 2011 -- Traffic
manager, SQL Azure reporting, HPC scheduler. June 2012 -- Websites,
Virtual machines for Windows and Linux, Python SDK, new portal, locally
redundant storage. April 2014 -- Windows Azure renamed Microsoft Azure,
ARM Portal introduced at Build 2014. July 2014 -- Azure Machine Learning
public preview. November 2014 -- Outage affecting major websites
including MSN.com. September 2015 -- Azure Cloud Switch introduced as a
cross-platform Linux distribution. Currently known as SONiC December,
2015 -- Azure ARM Portal (codename \"Ibiza\") released. March, 2016 --
Azure Service Fabric is Generally Available (GA) September 2017 --
Microsoft Azure gets a new logo and a Manifesto July 16, 2018 -- Azure
Service Fabric Mesh public preview September 24, 2018 -- Microsoft Azure
IoT Central is Generally Available (GA) October 10, 2018 -- Microsoft
joins the Linux-oriented group Open Invention Network. April 17, 2019 --
Azure Front Door Service is now available. March 2020 -- Microsoft said
that there was a 775% increase in Microsoft Teams usage in Italy due to
the COVID-19 pandemic. The company estimates there are now 44 million
daily active users of Teams worldwide. Privacy According to the USA
PATRIOT Act, Microsoft has acknowledged that the U.S. government can
access data even if the hosting company is not American and the data is
outside the U.S. To address concerns related to privacy and security,
Microsoft has established the Microsoft Azure Trust Center. Microsoft
Azure offers services that comply with multiple compliance programs,
including ISO 27001:2005 and HIPAA. A comprehensive and up-to-date list
of these services is available on the Microsoft Azure Trust Center
Compliance page. It\'s worth noting that Microsoft Azure has received
JAB Provisional Authority to Operate (P-ATO) from the U.S. government
under the Federal Risk and Authorization Management Program (FedRAMP)
guidelines. This program provides a standardized approach to security
assessment, authorization, and continuous monitoring for cloud services
used by the federal government. Significant outages The following is a
list of Microsoft Azure outages and service disruptions. Certifications
A large variety of Azure certifications can be attained, each requiring
one or multiple successfully completed examinations. Certification
levels range from beginner, intermediate to expert. Examples of common
certifications include: Azure Fundamentals Azure Developer Associate
Azure Administrator Associate Azure Data Engineers Associate Azure
Security Engineer Associate Azure Solutions Architect Expert Azure
DevOps Engineer Expert Key people Dave Cutler, Lead Developer, Microsoft
Azure Mark Russinovich, CTO, Microsoft Azure Scott Guthrie, Executive
Vice President of the Cloud and AI group in Microsoft Jason Zander,
Executive Vice President, Microsoft Azure Julia White, Corporate Vice
President, Microsoft Azure See also Cloud-computing comparison
Comparison of file hosting services Microsoft Azure Dev Tools for
Teaching CBL-Mariner References Citations Sources Further reading
External links Official website
