Midjourney is a generative artificial intelligence program and service
created and hosted by a San Francisco-based independent research lab
Midjourney, Inc. Midjourney generates images from natural language
descriptions, called \"prompts\", similar to OpenAI\'s DALL-E and Stable
Diffusion.The tool is currently in open beta, which it entered on July
12, 2022. The Midjourney team is led by David Holz, who co-founded Leap
Motion. Holz told The Register in August 2022 that the company was
already profitable. Users create artwork with Midjourney using Discord
bot commands. History Midjourney, Inc. was founded in San Francisco,
California by David Holz, previously co-founder of Leap Motion. The
Midjourney image generation platform first entered open beta on July 12,
2022. However, on March 14, 2022, the Discord server launched with a
request to post high-quality photographs to Twitter/Reddit for system\'s
training. Model versions The company has been working on improving its
algorithms, releasing new model versions every few months. Version 2 of
their algorithm was launched in April 2022 and version 3 on July 25. On
November 5, 2022, the alpha iteration of version 4 was released to users
and on March 15, 2023, the alpha iteration of version 5 was released.
The 5.1 model is more \'opinionated\' than version 5, applying more of
its own stylization to images, while the 5.1 RAW model adds improvement
while working better with more literal prompts. Functionality Midjourney
is currently only accessible through a Discord bot on their official
Discord server, by direct messaging the bot, or by inviting the bot to a
third party server. To generate images, users use the /imagine command
and type in a prompt; the bot then returns a set of four images. Users
may then choose which images they want to upscale. Midjourney is also
working on a web interface. Uses Founder David Holz says he sees artists
as customers, not competitors of Midjourney. Holz told The Register that
artists use Midjourney for rapid prototyping of artistic concepts to
show to clients before starting work themselves. Some artists have
accused Midjourney of devaluing original creative work by using it in
the training set; Midjourney\'s terms of service includes a DMCA
takedown policy, allowing artists to request their work to be removed
from the set if they believe copyright infringement to be evident.The
advertising industry has been quick to embrace AI tools such as
Midjourney, DALL-E, and Stable Diffusion, among others. The tools, which
enable advertisers to create original content and brainstorm ideas
quickly are providing new opportunities such as \"custom ads created for
individuals, a new way to create special effects, or even making
e-commerce advertising more efficient\", according to Ad Age. Notable
usage and controversy The program was used by the British magazine The
Economist to create the front cover for an issue in June 2022. In Italy,
the leading newspaper Corriere della Sera published a comic created with
Midjourney by writer Vanni Santoni in August 2022. Charlie Warzel used
Midjourney to generate two images of Alex Jones for Warzel\'s newsletter
in The Atlantic. The use of an AI-generated cover was criticised by
people who felt it was taking jobs from artists. Warzel called his
action a \"mistake\" in an article about his decision to use generated
images. Last Week Tonight with John Oliver included a 10-minute segment
on Midjourney in an episode broadcast in August 2022.A Midjourney image
called Théâtre d\'Opéra Spatial won first place in the digital art
competition at the 2022 Colorado State Fair. Jason Allen, who wrote the
prompt that led Midjourney to generate the image, printed the image onto
a canvas and entered it into the competition using the name \"Jason M.
Allen via Midjourney\". Other digital artists were upset by the news.
Allen was unapologetic, insisting that he followed the competition\'s
rules. The two category judges were unaware that Midjourney used AI to
generate images, although they later said that had they known this, they
would have awarded Allen the top prize anyway.In December 2022,
Midjourney was used to create the images in an AI-generated children\'s
book in the span of a weekend. Titled Alice and Sparkle, the book
features a young girl who builds a robot that becomes self-aware. The
creator, Ammaar Reeshi, spent hours tweaking Midjourney prompts,
rejecting hundreds of generated results to ultimately choose 13
illustrations for the book. Both the product and process drew criticism:
"the main problem\... is that it was trained off of artists' work. It's
our creations, our distinct styles that we created, that we did not
consent to being used,\" one artist wrote. Xi Jinping In March 2023, the
CEO David Holz stated that Midjourney has blocked the generation of
images of Xi Jinping, the general secretary of the Chinese Communist
Party and president of the People\'s Republic of China, in order to
prevent the Chinese government from potentially censoring Midjourney
completely over satirical images of Xi. Holz said that \"the ability for
people in China to use this tech is more important than your ability to
generate satire.\" Litigation On January 13, 2023, three artists --
Sarah Andersen, Kelly McKernan, and Karla Ortiz -- filed a copyright
infringement lawsuit against Stability AI, Midjourney, and DeviantArt,
claiming that these companies have infringed the rights of millions of
artists, by training AI tools on five billion images scraped from the
web, without the consent of the original artists. Subscription service
Midjourney has three subscription tiers, and previously offered a free
trial. As of April 2023, Midjourney, Inc. only offers a paid
subscription service after temporarily closing free trial access because
of high demand and trial abuse. It doesn\'t provide free access to the
image generation services. Users have to pay either monthly or yearly to
use the service. When the free trial was available, generating an image
activated it. Trial users could make roughly 25 jobs before needing to
subscribe to continue using it. Gallery See also 15.ai AI Dungeon
Artificial intelligence art Character.ai Computer art DALL-E DreamBooth
Generative art NovelAI Stable Diffusion Synthography References External
links Official website Official Twitter Official Discord server
