Mila - Quebec AI Institute (originally Montreal Institute for Learning
Algorithms) is a research institute in Montreal, Quebec, focusing mainly
on machine learning research. Approximately 1000 students and
researchers and 100 faculty members, were part of Mila in 2022. Mila is
part of the Pan-Canadian AI Strategy. History Mila traces its
foundations to the Laboratoire d\'informatique des systèmes adaptatifs
(LISA) at the Université de Montréal and to the Reasoning and Learning
Lab (RL-Lab) at McGill University. LISA was founded in 1993 by Yoshua
Bengio, a Turing award winner and one of the founders of the field of
deep learning while the RL-Lab was founded in 2001 and is currently
co-directed by Professors Prakash Panangaden, Doina Precup, Joëlle
Pineau, and Jackie Chi Kit Cheung. In 2017, Mila-Quebec AI Institute was
established as a partnership between the Université de Montréal and
McGill University with École Polytechnique de Montréal and HEC Montréal.
In December 2020, Mila teamed up with IBM to accelerate artificial
intelligence (AI) and machine learning research using open-source
technology in a bid to integrate the Quebec institute's open-source
software, Oríon, with IBM's Watson Machine Learning Accelerator, an AI
model training and inference tool that the tech giant offers to
businesses. Notable researchers Besides Bengio, Mila\'s faculty members
include Joëlle Pineau and Doina Precup. Some of its graduates include
Marc Bellemare (MSc 2007 - RL-Lab), Hugo Larochelle (PhD 2009 - LISA)
and Ian Goodfellow (PhD 2014 - LISA). Research activities Research at
Mila is largely, but not exclusively focused on deep learning and
reinforcement learning. Specific research topics include: generative
models natural language processing meta learning computer vision
reinforcement learning applications of AI, including: climate change
research and COVID-19 research. Board of Directors Board of Directors
that watch over Mila\'s strategic directions are : ALEXANDRE LE
BOUTHILLIER, General Partner - Linearis ALEXANDRE SYNETT ANNE-MARIE
HUBERT, Managing Partner - Ernst & Young BENOIT BOULET, Associate Dean
(Research & Innovation) - McGill University CAROLINE AUBÉ, Director of
Research and Knowledge Transfer, HEC Montreal EUGÉNIE BROUILLET,
Associate Dean (Research, Creation and Innovation) - Université Laval
FRÉDÉRIC BOUCHARD, Dean Faculty of Arts and Science - Université de
Montréal JOSÉE MORIN, Company Administrator MAGALY CHARBONNEAU, Hi-tech
Venture Capitalist - Inovia Capital MARIE-JOSÉE HÉBERT, Vice Rector,
Research, Discovery, Creation and Innovation - Université de Montréal
MARTHA CRAGO, Vice-Principal, Research and Innovation - McGill
University MATHIEU GERVAIS, Observer, Assistant Deputy Minister for
Science and Innovation at the Ministère de l\'Économie et de
l\'innovation PIERRE BOIVIN, President, Board of Directors, President
and Chief Executive Officer - Claridge VALERIE PISANO, Observer, Board
of Directors, President and CEO - Mila YOSHUA BENGIO, Observer, Board of
Directors, Scientific Director, Mila & IVADO Other activities Mila is
both a research and educational institution, providing postdoc and
internship positions, and providing a research environment for students
enrolled in their respective universities and working towards their
graduate degrees such as PhD and Master\'s degrees in machine learning.
Mila members have also contributed to open-source software. Theano, one
of the early programming frameworks for deep learning originated at
Mila. In 2020, active projects included myia, a deep learning framework
for Python, and baby-ai, a platform for simulating language learning
with a human in the loop.In addition, Mila is also involved in numerous
partnerships with private companies. References External links Mila
