mlpack is a machine learning software library for C++, built on top of
the Armadillo library and the ensmallen numerical optimization library.
mlpack has an emphasis on scalability, speed, and ease-of-use. Its aim
is to make machine learning possible for novice users by means of a
simple, consistent API, while simultaneously exploiting C++ language
features to provide maximum performance and maximum flexibility for
expert users. Its intended target users are scientists and engineers. It
is open-source software distributed under the BSD license, making it
useful for developing both open source and proprietary software.
Releases 1.0.11 and before were released under the LGPL license. The
project is supported by the Georgia Institute of Technology and
contributions from around the world. Miscellaneous features Class
templates for GRU, LSTM structures are available, thus the library also
supports Recurrent Neural Networks. There are bindings to R, Go, Julia,
and Python. Its binding system is extensible to other languages.
Supported algorithms Currently mlpack supports the following algorithms
and models: Collaborative Filtering Decision stumps (one-level decision
trees) Density Estimation Trees Euclidean minimum spanning trees
Gaussian Mixture Models (GMMs) Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) Kernel
density estimation (KDE) Kernel Principal Component Analysis (KPCA)
K-Means Clustering Least-Angle Regression (LARS/LASSO) Linear Regression
Bayesian Linear Regression Local Coordinate Coding Locality-Sensitive
Hashing (LSH) Logistic regression Max-Kernel Search Naive Bayes
Classifier Nearest neighbor search with dual-tree algorithms
Neighbourhood Components Analysis (NCA) Non-negative Matrix
Factorization (NMF) Principal Components Analysis (PCA) Independent
component analysis (ICA) Rank-Approximate Nearest Neighbor (RANN) Simple
Least-Squares Linear Regression (and Ridge Regression) Sparse Coding,
Sparse dictionary learning Tree-based Neighbor Search
(all-k-nearest-neighbors, all-k-furthest-neighbors), using either
kd-trees or cover trees Tree-based Range Search See also Armadillo (C++
library) List of numerical analysis software List of numerical libraries
Numerical linear algebra Scientific computing References External links
Official website mlpack on GitHub
