Naomi Altman is a statistician known for her work on kernel
smoothing\[KS\] and kernel regression,\[KR\] and interested in
applications of statistics to gene expression and genomics. She is a
professor of statistics at Pennsylvania State University, and a regular
columnist for the \"Points of Significance\" column in Nature Methods.
Education and career Altman studied mathematics at the University of
Toronto, graduating in 1974, and spent two years teaching at Government
Teacher\'s Training College in Lafia, Nigeria. Returning to Canada, she
earned a master\'s degree in statistics from Toronto in 1979.After
working as a statistical consultant at Simon Fraser University and the
University of British Columbia. She completed her doctorate in 1988 from
Stanford University. Her dissertation, supervised by Iain M. Johnstone,
was Smoothing Data with Correlated Errors.She joined the Cornell
University faculty, in the Biometrics Unit, and became chair of the
Department of Biometrics there from 1997 to 2000. She moved to Penn
State in 2001. Recognition Altman and her coauthor Julio C. Villarreal
won the 2005 Canadian Journal of Statistics Award for their paper
\"Self-modelling regression for longitudinal data with time-invariant
covariates\".\[AV\] In 2009, Altman became a Fellow of the American
Statistical Association. Selected publications References External links
Home page
