Neural Lab is a no-cost neural network simulator that designs and trains
artificial neural networks for use in many fields such as engineering,
business, computer science and technology. It integrates with Microsoft
Visual Studio using C (Win32 - Wintempla) to incorporate artificial
neural networks into custom applications, research simulations or end
user interfaces. It provides a visual environment to design and test
artificial neural networks. The latest Neural Lab version is 4.1. The
two major versions are version 3.1 and 4.0. Version 3.x Version 3.1 is
navigated using a standard computer mouse. Version 3.1 is considered
easier to use, however, it is difficult to perform complex tasks
programmatically. Version 3.1 is therefore primarily useful for people
without a programming background. The version 3.1 tutorial provided
minimal theoretical background on artificial neural networks. Despite
the number of examples, most of the examples focus only on multi-layer
networks with supervised training. Version 4.x In version 4.0, it is
possible to perform neural network operations by writing code. The code
is very similar to C/C++, Java or C#. In version 4.0, the authors
incorporate background information on artificial neural networks.
Version 4.0 incorporates Kohonen networks that can be trained without
supervision and probabilistic neural networks. Features The tools allow
reviewing and analyzing the structure of the training set. The
activation of the neurons for each case in the data set are visible. The
tutorial provides examples in prediction, data mapping, data
classification and auto associative memory problems. Once a network has
been trained, it is possible to save it to a file. The file can be
opened using Microsoft Visual Studio to create a standalone application
that can employ the network. Applications Specific examples of neural
networks include: Prediction Mapping Auto Association Classification
Network Simulation Wintempla Neural Lab is developed using Wintempla (a
plug in that works with Microsoft Visual Studio). Wintempla encapsulates
Win32 and simplifies the development of Microsoft Windows applications
using C++ and native Win32 APIs. Wintempla is a tool that integrates
with Microsoft Visual Studio. Wintempla encapsulates Win32 to simplify
the creation of Web and Desktop applications using C++ and
object-oriented programming. The programmer has the option to use the
native Win32 APIs or the Wintempla classes. Wintempla includes: File
extensions .lab Neural Lab code (a UNICODE text file) .lay A multi-layer
neural network file .lax A complex-domain multi-layer neural network
file .koh A Kohonen neural network file .prb A probabilistic neural
network file .csv A comma separated values file See also Artificial
neural network Neural network software Generative Adversarial Network
References Masters, Timothy (25 July 1994). Signal and Image Processing
with Neural Networks: A C++ Sourcebook. John Wiley & Sons. ISBN
978-0-471-04963-0. Masters, Timothy (17 April 1995). Advanced algorithms
for neural networks: a C++ sourcebook. Wiley. ISBN 978-0-471-10588-6.
External links Official website Download Latest Version (Run on
Microsoft Windows: Vista, 8, 8.1 or 10)
