An operational definition specifies concrete, replicable procedures
designed to represent a construct. In the words of American psychologist
S.S. Stevens (1935), \"An operation is the performance which we execute
in order to make known a concept.\" For example, an operational
definition of \"fear\" (the construct) often includes measurable
physiologic responses that occur in response to a perceived threat.
Thus, \"fear\" might be operationally defined as specified changes in
heart rate, galvanic skin response, pupil dilation, and blood pressure.
Overview An operational definition is designed to model or represent a
concept or theoretical definition, also known as a construct. Scientists
should describe the operations (procedures, actions, or processes) that
define the concept with enough specificity such that other investigators
can replicate their research.Operational definitions are also used to
define system states in terms of a specific, publicly accessible process
of preparation or validation testing. For example, 100 degrees Celsius
may be operationally defined as the process of heating water at sea
level until it is observed to boil. A cake can be operationally defined
by a cake recipe. Application Despite the controversial philosophical
origins of the concept, particularly its close association with logical
positivism, operational definitions have undisputed practical
applications. This is especially so in the social and medical sciences,
where operational definitions of key terms are used to preserve the
unambiguous empirical testability of hypothesis and theory. Operational
definitions are also important in the physical sciences. Philosophy The
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry on scientific realism, written
by Richard Boyd, indicates that the modern concept owes its origin in
part to Percy Williams Bridgman, who felt that the expression of
scientific concepts was often abstract and unclear. Inspired by Ernst
Mach, in 1914 Bridgman attempted to redefine unobservable entities
concretely in terms of the physical and mental operations used to
measure them. Accordingly, the definition of each unobservable entity
was uniquely identified with the instrumentation used to define it. From
the beginning objections were raised to this approach, in large part
around the inflexibility. As Boyd notes, \"In actual, and apparently
reliable, scientific practice, changes in the instrumentation associated
with theoretical terms are routine. and apparently crucial to the
progress of science. According to a \'pure\' operationalist conception,
these sorts of modifications would not be methodologically acceptable,
since each definition must be considered to identify a unique \'object\'
(or class of objects).\" However, this rejection of operationalism as a
general project destined ultimately to define all experiential phenomena
uniquely did not mean that operational definitions ceased to have any
practical use or that they could not be applied in particular cases.
Science The special theory of relativity can be viewed as the
introduction of operational definitions for simultaneity of events and
of distance, that is, as providing the operations needed to define these
terms.In quantum mechanics the notion of operational definitions is
closely related to the idea of observables, that is, definitions based
upon what can be measured.Operational definitions are often most
challenging in the fields of psychology and psychiatry, where intuitive
concepts, such as intelligence need to be operationally defined before
they become amenable to scientific investigation, for example, through
processes such as IQ tests. Business On October 15, 1970, the West Gate
Bridge in Melbourne, Australia collapsed, killing 35 construction
workers. The subsequent enquiry found that the failure arose because
engineers had specified the supply of a quantity of flat steel plate.
The word flat in this context lacked an operational definition, so there
was no test for accepting or rejecting a particular shipment or for
controlling quality. In his managerial and statistical writings, W.
Edwards Deming placed great importance on the value of using operational
definitions in all agreements in business. As he said: \"An operational
definition is a procedure agreed upon for translation of a concept into
measurement of some kind.\" -- W. Edwards Deming\"There is no true value
of any characteristic, state, or condition that is defined in terms of
measurement or observation. Change of procedure for measurement (change
of operational definition) or observation produces a new number.\" -- W.
Edwards Deming General process Operational, in a process context, also
can denote a working method or a philosophy that focuses principally on
cause and effect relationships (or stimulus/response, behavior, etc.) of
specific interest to a particular domain at a particular point in time.
As a working method, it does not consider issues related to a domain
that are more general, such as the ontological, etc. In computing
Science uses computing. Computing uses science. We have seen the
development of computer science. There are not many who can bridge all
three of these. One effect is that, when results are obtained using a
computer, the results can be impossible to replicate if the code is
poorly documented, contains errors, or if parts are omitted
entirely.Many times, issues are related to persistence and clarity of
use of variables, functions, and so forth. Also, systems dependence is
an issue. In brief, length (as a standard) has matter as its
definitional basis. What pray tell can be used when standards are to be
computationally framed? Hence, operational definition can be used within
the realm of the interactions of humans with advanced computational
systems. In this sense, one area of discourse deals with computational
thinking in, and with how it might influence, the sciences. To quote the
American Scientist: The computer revolution has profoundly affected how
we think about science, experimentation, and research.One referenced
project pulled together fluid experts, including some who were expert in
the numeric modeling related to computational fluid dynamics, in a team
with computer scientists. Essentially, it turned out that the computer
guys did not know enough to weigh in as much as they would have liked.
Thus, their role, to their chagrin, many times was \"mere\" programmer.
Some knowledge-based engineering projects experienced similarly that
there is a trade-off between trying to teach programming to a domain
expert versus getting a programmer to understand the intricacies of a
domain. That, of course, depends upon the domain. In short, any team
member has to decide which side of the coin to spend one\'s time. The
International Society for Technology in Education has a brochure
detailing an \"operational definition\" of computational thinking. At
the same time, the ISTE made an attempt at defining related skills.A
recognized skill is tolerance for ambiguity and being able to handle
open-ended problems. For instance, a knowledge-based engineering system
can enhance its operational aspect and thereby its stability through
more involvement by the subject-matter expert, thereby opening up issues
of limits that are related to being human. As in, many times,
computational results have to be taken at face value due to several
factors (hence the duck test\'s necessity arises) that even an expert
cannot overcome. The end proof may be the final results (reasonable
facsimile by simulation or artifact, working design, etc.) that are not
guaranteed to be repeatable, may have been costly to attain (time and
money), and so forth. In advanced modeling, with the requisite
computational support such as knowledge-based engineering, mappings must
be maintained between a real-world object, its abstracted counterparts
as defined by the domain and its experts, and the computer models.
Mismatches between domain models and their computational mirrors can
raise issues apropos this topic. Techniques that allow the flexible
modeling required for many hard problems must resolve issues of
identity, type, etc. which then lead to methods, such as duck typing.
Many domains, with a numerics focus, use limit theory, of various sorts,
to overcome the duck test necessity with varying degrees of success.
Yet, with that, issues still remain as representational frameworks bear
heavily on what we can know. In arguing for an object-based methodology,
Peter Wegner suggested that \"positivist scientific philosophies, such
as operationalism in physics and behaviorism in psychology\" were
powerfully applied in the early part of the 20th century. However,
computation has changed the landscape. He notes that we need to
distinguish four levels of \"irreversible physical and computational
abstraction\" (Platonic abstraction, computational approximation,
functional abstraction, and value computation). Then, we must rely on
interactive methods, that have behavior as their focus (see duck test).
Examples Temperature The thermodynamic definition of temperature, due to
Nicolas LÃ©onard Sadi Carnot, refers to heat \"flowing\" between
\"infinite reservoirs\". This is all highly abstract and unsuited for
the day-to-day world of science and trade. In order to make the idea
concrete, temperature is defined in terms of operations with the gas
thermometer. However, these are sophisticated and delicate instruments,
only adapted to the national standardization laboratory. For day-to-day
use, the International Temperature Scale of 1990 (ITS) is used, defining
temperature in terms of characteristics of the several specific sensor
types required to cover the full range. One such is the electrical
resistance of a thermistor, with specified construction, calibrated
against operationally defined fixed points. Electric current Electric
current is defined in terms of the force between two infinite parallel
conductors, separated by a specified distance. This definition is too
abstract for practical measurement, so a device known as a current
balance is used to define the ampere operationally. Mechanical hardness
Unlike temperature and electric current, there is no abstract physical
concept of the hardness of a material. It is a slightly vague,
subjective idea, somewhat like the idea of intelligence. In fact, it
leads to three more specific ideas: Scratch hardness measured on Mohs\'
scale; Indentation hardness; and Rebound, or dynamic, hardness measured
with a Shore scleroscope.Of these, indentation hardness itself leads to
many operational definitions, the most important of which are: Brinell
hardness test -- using a 10 mm steel ball; Vickers hardness test --
using a pyramidal diamond indenter; and Rockwell hardness test -- using
a diamond cone indenter.In all these, a process is defined for loading
the indenter, measuring the resulting indentation, and calculating a
hardness number. Each of these three sequences of measurement operations
produces numbers that are consistent with our subjective idea of
hardness. The harder the material to our informal perception, the
greater the number it will achieve on our respective hardness scales.
Furthermore, experimental results obtained using these measurement
methods has shown that the hardness number can be used to predict the
stress required to permanently deform steel, a characteristic that fits
in well with our idea of resistance to permanent deformation. However,
there is not always a simple relationship between the various hardness
scales. Vickers and Rockwell hardness numbers exhibit qualitatively
different behaviour when used to describe some materials and phenomena.
The constellation Virgo The constellation Virgo is a specific
constellation of stars in the sky, hence the process of forming Virgo
cannot be an operational definition, since it is historical and not
repeatable. Nevertheless, the process whereby we locate Virgo in the sky
is repeatable, so in this way, Virgo is operationally defined. In fact,
Virgo can have any number of definitions (although we can never prove
that we are talking about the same Virgo), and any number may be
operational. Academic discipline New academic disciplines appear in
response to interdisciplinary activity at universities. An academic
suggested that a subject matter area becomes a discipline when there are
more than a dozen university departments using the same name for roughly
the same subject matter. Theoretical vs operational definition See also
Duck test Operationalization Pragmatic maxim Pragmaticism Pragmatism
Theoretical/ Conceptual definition References Further reading
Ballantyne, Paul F. History and Theory of Psychology Course, in
Langfeld, H.S. (1945). Introduction to the Symposium on Operationism.
Psyc. Rev. 32, 241--243.\[1\] Bohm, D. (1996). On Dialog. N.Y.:
Routledge. Boyd, Richard. (1959).On the Current Status of the Issue of
Scientific Realism in Erkenntnis. 19, 45--90. Bridgman, P. W. The way
things are. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. Carnap, Rudolph.
(1959). The Elimination of Metaphysics Through Logical Analysis of
Language in Ayer, A.J. Churchland, Patricia. (1986). Neurophilosophy---
Toward a unified science of the mind/brain, MIT Press. Churchland, Paul.
(1989). A Neurocomputational Perspective--- The Nature of Mind and the
Structure of Science, MIT Press. Dennett, Daniel C. (1992).Consciousness
Explained, Little, Brown & Co.. Depraz, N. (1999). \"The
phenomenological reduction as praxis.\" Journal of Consciousness
Studies, 6(2-3), 95--110. Green, C. D. (1992). \"Of Immortal
Mythological Beasts: Operationism in Psychology.\" Theory & Psychology,
2, 291--320 \[2\] Hardcastle, G. L. (1995). \"S.S. Stevens and the
origins of operationism.\" Philosophy of Science, 62, 404--424. Hermans,
H. J. M. (1996). \"Voicing the self: from information processing to
dialogical interchange.\" Psychological Bulletin, 119(1), 31--50. Hyman,
Bronwen, U of Toronto, and Shephard, Alfred H., U of Manitoba. (1980).
\"Zeitgeist: The Development of an Operational Definition\", The Journal
of Mind and Behavior, 1(2), 227--246. Leahy, Thomas H., Virginia
Commonwealth U. (1980). The Myth of Operationism, ibid,, 127--144.
Ribes-Inesta, Emilio \"What Is Defined In Operational Definitions? The
Case Of Operant Psychology,\" Behavior and Philosophy, 2003.\[3\]
Roepstorff, A. & Jack, A. (2003). \"Editorial introduction, Special
Issue: Trusting the Subject? (Part 1).\" Journal of Consciousness
Studies, 10(9--10), v--xx. Roepstorff, A. & Jack, A. (2004). \"Trust or
Interaction? Editorial introduction, Special Issue: Trusting the
Subject? (Part 2).\" Journal of Consciousness Studies, 11(7--8),
v--xxii. Stevens, S. S. (1963).Operationism and logical positivism, in
M. H. Marx (Ed.), Theories in contemporary psychology (pp. 47--76). New
York: MacMillan. Thomson --- Waddsworth, eds., Learning Psychology:
Operational Definitions Research Methods Workshops\[4\]
