Oracle Cloud is a cloud computing service offered by Oracle Corporation
providing servers, storage, network, applications and services through a
global network of Oracle Corporation managed data centers. The company
allows these services to be provisioned on demand over the Internet.
Oracle Cloud provides Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS), Platform as a
Service (PaaS), Software as a Service (SaaS), and Data as a Service
(DaaS). These services are used to build, deploy, integrate, and extend
applications in the cloud. This platform supports numerous open
standards (SQL, HTML5, REST, etc.), open-source applications
(Kubernetes, Spark, Hadoop, Kafka, MySQL, Terraform, etc.), and a
variety of programming languages, databases, tools, and frameworks
including Oracle-specific, Open Source, and third-party software and
systems. Services Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) and Platform as a
Service (PaaS) Oracle\'s cloud infrastructure was made generally
available (GA) on October 20, 2016 under the name \"Oracle Bare Metal
Cloud Services.\" Oracle Bare Metal Cloud Services was rebranded as
Oracle Cloud Infrastructure in 2018 and dubbed Oracle\'s \"Generation 2
Cloud\" at Oracle OpenWorld 2018. Oracle Cloud Infrastructure offerings
include the following services: Compute: The company provides Virtual
Machine Instances to provide different shapes (VM sizes) catering to
different types of workloads and performance characteristics. They also
provide on-demand Bare metal servers and Bare metal GPU servers, without
a hypervisor. In 2016, Oracle Cloud Infrastructure launched with bare
metal instances with Intel processors. These first bare metal instances
offered were powered by Intel servers. In 2018, Oracle Cloud added bare
metal instances powered by AMD processors, followed by Ampere
Cloud-native processors in 2021. In 2021, Oracle also released its first
VM-based compute instances based on Arm processors. Storage: The
platform provides block volumes, file storage, object storage, and
archive storage for database, analytics, content, and other applications
across common protocols and APIs. Networking: This cloud platform
provides network with fully configurable IP addresses, subnets, routing,
and firewalls to support new or existing private networks with
end-to-end security. Governance: For auditing, identity and access
management, the platform has data integrity checks, traceability, and
access management features. Database Management / Data Management:
Oracle offers a data management platform for database workloads as well
as hyper-scale big data and streaming workloads including OLTP, data
warehousing, Spark, machine learning, text search, image analytics, data
catalog, and deep learning. The platform allows Oracle, MySQL, and NoSQL
databases to be deployed on demand as managed cloud services. Oracle
Databases uniquely offer the Oracle Autonomous Database (optimized for
data warehouse, transaction processing, or JSON), the Exadata shape, as
well as Real Application Clusters (RAC). Load Balancing: The cloud
platform offers load balancing capability to automatically route traffic
across fault domains and availability domains for high availability and
fault-tolerance for hosted applications. Edge Services: These services
can monitor the path between users and resources and adapt to changes
and outages using secure DNS infrastructure. FastConnect: The cloud
platform provides private connectivity across on-premises and cloud
networks through providers like Equinix, AT&T, and Colt. Application
Development: For application development, the company's cloud offers an
open, standards-based application development platform to build, deploy,
and manage API-first, mobile-first cloud applications. This platform
supports container-native, cloud-native, and low code development. This
platform also provides a DevOps platform for CI/CD, diagnostics for Java
applications, and integration with SaaS and on-prem applications.
Services include Java, mobile, digital assistants (evolution from
chatbots), messaging, application container cloud, developer cloud,
visual builder, API catalog, AI platform, DataScience.com (Oracle
acquired) and blockchain. Integration: This is a platform offering with
adapters to integrate on-premise and cloud applications. Capabilities
include data integration and replication, API management, integration
analytics, along with data migration and integration. They offer
services such as data integration platform cloud, data integrator cloud
service, GoldenGate cloud service, integration cloud, process cloud
service, API platform cloud service, apiary cloud service, and SOA cloud
service. Business Analytics: The company provides this business
analytics platform which can analyze and generate insights from data
across various applications, data warehouses, and data lakes. The
services offered include analytics cloud, business intelligence, big
data discovery, big data preparation, data visualization, and essbase.
Security: The Oracle Cloud Platform provides identity and security
applications for providing secure access and monitoring of hybrid cloud
environment and addressing IT governance and compliance requirements.
This platform delivers an identity SOC (Security Operations Center)
through a combined offering of SIEM, UEBA, CASB,l, and IDaaS. The
services offered include Identity Cloud Service and CASB Cloud Service.
Management: The platform provides an integrated monitoring, management,
and analytics platform. This platform also uses machine learning and big
data on the operational data set. The platform is used to improve IT
stability, prevent application outages, improve DevOps, and harden
security. Services offered include Application Performance Monitoring,
Infrastructure Monitoring, Log Analytics, Orchestration, IT Analytics,
Configuration and Compliance, Security Monitoring, and Analytics.
Content and Experience: This is a platform for content, website, and
workflow management. This service is used to provide content
collaboration and web presence. This tool comes integrated with Oracle
on-premise and SaaS services. The services offered are Content and
Experience Cloud, WebCenter Portal Cloud, and DIVA Cloud.In 2016, Oracle
acquired Dyn, an internet infrastructure company. On May 16, 2018 Oracle
announced that it had acquired DataScience.com, a privately held cloud
workspace platform for data science projects and workloads. In April
2020, Oracle became the cloud infrastructure provider for Zoom, an
online and video meeting platform. The same month, Nissan announced its
migration to Oracle Cloud for its high-performance computing (HPC)
workloads used for simulating the structural impacts of a car design.
Xerox announced a partnership with Oracle Cloud in 2021, where Xerox
will use Oracle's cloud-computing capabilities within its business
incubator. Software as a Service (SaaS) Oracle provides SaaS
applications also known as Oracle Cloud Applications. These applications
are offered across a variety of products, industrial sectors with
various deployment options to adhere to compliance standards. The below
list mentions Oracle Cloud Applications provided by Oracle Corporation.
Customer Experience (CX) Human Capital Management (HCM) Enterprise
Resource Planning (ERP) Supply Chain Management (SCM) Enterprise
Performance Management (EPM) Internet of Things Applications (IoT) SaaS
Analytics Data Industry Solutions (Communications, Financial Services,
Consumer Goods, High Tech and Manufacturing, Higher Education,
Hospitality, Utilities) Deployment (adhering to standards for sectors
such as Financial Services, Retail Services, Public Sector, Defense)
Block-Chain Cloud Service (in partnership with SAP, IBM and Microsoft)
Blockchain ApplicationsOn July 28, 2016 Oracle bought NetSuite, the very
first cloud company, for \$9.3 billion. Data as a Service (DaaS) This
platform is known as the Oracle Data Cloud. This platform aggregates and
analyzes consumer data powered by Oracle ID Graph across channels and
devices to create cross-channel consumer understanding. Deployment
models Oracle Cloud is available in 37 regions as of March 2022,
including North America, South America, UK, European Union, Middle East,
Africa, India, Australia, Korea, and Japan. Oracle Cloud is available as
a public cloud (Oracle-managed regions); to select government agencies
as an Oracle-managed government cloud in the United States (with FedRAMP
High and DISA SRG IL5 compliance) and United Kingdom; and as a \"private
cloud\" or \"hybrid cloud\" as an Oracle-managed database-only service
or full-service dedicated region - what Oracle calls \"Cloud at
Customer.\" Architecture Oracle\'s public and government cloud is
offered through a global network of Oracle-managed data centers,
connected by an Oracle-managed backbone network. Oracle\'s Exadata Cloud
at Customer leverages this network for control plane services. Oracle
deploys their cloud in Regions, typically with two geographically
distributed regions in each country for disaster resiliency with data
sovereignty. Inside each Region are at least one fault-independent
Availability Domain and three fault-tolerant Fault Domains per
Availability Domain. Each Availability Domains contains an independent
data center with power, thermal, and network isolation.Oracle Cloud
hosts customer-accessible cloud infrastructure and platform services, as
well as end-user accessible software as a service from these cloud
regions. See also Oracle Advertising and Customer Experience (CX) Oracle
Enterprise Resource Planning Cloud Oracle HCM Cloud References External
links Official website End-to-End Automation Testing for Oracle Cloud
