pandas is a software library written for the Python programming language
for data manipulation and analysis. In particular, it offers data
structures and operations for manipulating numerical tables and time
series. It is free software released under the three-clause BSD license.
The name is derived from the term \"panel data\", an econometrics term
for data sets that include observations over multiple time periods for
the same individuals. Its name is a play on the phrase \"Python data
analysis\" itself. Wes McKinney started building what would become
pandas at AQR Capital while he was a researcher there from 2007 to 2010.
DataFrames Pandas is mainly used for data analysis and associated
manipulation of tabular data in DataFrames. Pandas allows importing data
from various file formats such as comma-separated values, JSON, Parquet,
SQL database tables or queries, and Microsoft Excel. Pandas allows
various data manipulation operations such as merging, reshaping,
selecting, as well as data cleaning, and data wrangling features. The
development of pandas introduced into Python many comparable features of
working with DataFrames that were established in the R programming
language. The pandas library is built upon another library NumPy, which
is oriented to efficiently working with arrays instead of the features
of working on DataFrames. History Developer Wes McKinney started working
on pandas in 2008 while at AQR Capital Management out of the need for a
high performance, flexible tool to perform quantitative analysis on
financial data. Before leaving AQR he was able to convince management to
allow him to open source the library. Another AQR employee, Chang She,
joined the effort in 2012 as the second major contributor to the
library. In 2015, pandas signed on as a fiscally sponsored project of
NumFOCUS, a 501(c)(3) nonprofit charity in the United States. See also
matplotlib NumPy Dask SciPy R (programming language) scikit-learn
statsmodels List of numerical analysis software References Further
reading McKinney, Wes (2017). Python for Data Analysis : Data Wrangling
with Pandas, NumPy, and IPython (2nd ed.). Sebastopol: O\'Reilly. ISBN
978-1-4919-5766-0. Molin, Stefanie (2019). Hands-On Data Analysis with
Pandas: Efficiently perform data collection, wrangling, analysis, and
visualization using Python. Packt. ISBN 978-1-7896-1532-6. Chen, Daniel
Y. (2018). Pandas for Everyone : Python Data Analysis. Boston:
Addison-Wesley. ISBN 978-0-13-454693-3. VanderPlas, Jake (2016). \"Data
Manipulations with Pandas\". Python Data Science Handbook: Essential
Tools for Working with Data. O\'Reilly. pp. 97--216. ISBN
978-1-4919-1205-8. Pathak, Chankey (2018). Pandas Cookbook. pp. 1--8.
