Peter E. Hart (born 1941) is an American computer scientist and
entrepreneur. He was chairman and president of Ricoh Innovations, which
he founded in 1997. He made significant contributions in the field of
computer science in a series of widely cited publications from the years
1967--75 while associated with the Artificial Intelligence Center of SRI
International, a laboratory where he also served as director. Education
Hart studied at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, leading to a BEE
degree (1962). He did his graduate studies at Stanford University, where
he got his MS (1963) and PhD (1966); Thomas M. Cover was his advisor and
discovered & co-published a seminal paper on 1-NN nearest neighbor
search. Career While at the SRI International Artificial Intelligence
Center, Hart co-authored 20 papers, among them the initial exposition of
the A\* search algorithm and the variant of the Hough transform now
widely used in computer vision for finding straight line segments in
images. He also contributed to the development of Shakey the Robot.Hart
and Richard O. Duda are the authors of \"Pattern Classification and
Scene Analysis\", originally published in 1973. This classic text is a
widely cited reference, and the first edition was in print for over 25
years until being superseded by the second edition in 2000.A strong
advocate of artificial intelligence in industry, Hart was the founding
director of the Fairchild/Schlumberger Artificial Intelligence Center
and co-founder of Syntelligence, a company specializing in expert
systems for financial risk analysis.Hart is currently Group Senior Vice
President at the Ricoh Company, Ltd. Memberships and awards Hart is an
IEEE Fellow, an ACM Fellow and an AAAI Fellow. References External links
Hart\'s personal web page Hart\'s web page at Ricoh Innovations
