PolyAnalyst is a data science software platform developed by Megaputer
Intelligence that provides an environment for text mining, data mining,
machine learning, and predictive analytics. It is used by Megaputer to
build tools with applications to health care, business management,
insurance, and other industries. PolyAnalyst has also been used for
COVID-19 forecasting and scientific research. Overview PolyAnalyst\'s
graphical user interface contains nodes that can be linked into a
flowchart to perform an analysis. The software provides nodes for data
import, data preparation, data visualization, data analysis, and data
export. PolyAnalyst includes features for text clustering, sentiment
analysis, extraction of facts, keywords, and entities, and the creation
of taxonomies and ontologies. Polyanalyst supports a variety of machine
learning algorithms, as well as nodes for the analysis of structured
data and the ability to execute code in Python and R. PolyAnalyst also
acts as a report generator, which allows the result of an analysis to be
made viewable by non-analysts. It uses a client--server model and is
licensed under a software as a service model. Business Applications
Insurance PolyAnalyst was used to build a subrogation prediction tool
which determines the likelihood that a claim is subrogatable, and if so,
the amount that is expected to be recovered. The tool works by
categorizing insurance claims based on whether or not they meet the
criteria that are needed for successful subrogation. PolyAnalyst is also
used to detect insurance fraud. Health care PolyAnalyst is used by
pharmaceutical companies to assist in pharmacovigilance. The software
was used to design a tool that matches descriptions of adverse events to
their proper MedDRA codes, determines if side-effects are serious or
non-serious, and to set up cases for ongoing monitoring if needed.
PolyAnalyst has also been applied to discover new uses for existing
drugs by text mining ClinicalTrials.gov and to forecast the spread of
the COVID-19 virus in the United States and Russia. Business management
PolyAnalyst is used in business management to analyze written customer
feedback including product review data, warranty claims, and customer
comments. In one case, PolyAnalyst was used to build a tool which helped
a company monitor its employees\' conversations with customers by rating
their messages for factors such as professionalism, empathy, and
correctness of response. The company reported to Forrester Research that
this tool had saved them \$11.8 million annually. SKIF Cyberia
Supercomputer PolyAnalyst is run on the SKIF Cyberia Supercomputer at
Tomsk State University, where it is made available to Russian
researchers through the Center for Collective Use (CCU). Researchers at
the center use PolyAnalyst to perform scientific research and to
management the operations of their universities. In 2020, researchers at
Vyatka State University (in collaboration with the CCU) performed a
study in which PolyAnalyst was used to identify and reach out to victims
of domestic violence through social media analysis. The researchers
scraped the web for messages containing descriptions of abuse, and then
classified the type of abuse as physical, psychological, economic, or
sexual. They also constructed a chatbot to contact the identified
victims of abuse and to refer them to specialists based on the type of
abuse described in their messages. The data collected in this study was
used to create the first ever Russian-language corpus on domestic
violence. References External links Official website
