Precision agriculture (PA) is a farming management strategy based on
observing, measuring and responding to temporal and spatial variability
to improve agricultural production sustainability. It is used in both
crop and livestock production. Precision agriculture often employs
technologies to automate agricultural operations, improving their
diagnosis, decision-making or performing. First conceptual work on PA
and practical applications go back in the late 1980s. The goal of
precision agriculture research is to define a decision support system
(DSS) for whole farm management with the goal of optimizing returns on
inputs while preserving resources.Among these many approaches is a
phytogeomorphological approach which ties multi-year crop growth
stability/characteristics to topological terrain attributes. The
interest in the phytogeomorphological approach stems from the fact that
the geomorphology component typically dictates the hydrology of the farm
field.The practice of precision agriculture has been enabled by the
advent of GPS and GNSS. The farmer\'s and/or researcher\'s ability to
locate their precise position in a field allows for the creation of maps
of the spatial variability of as many variables as can be measured (e.g.
crop yield, terrain features/topography, organic matter content,
moisture levels, nitrogen levels, pH, EC, Mg, K, and others). Similar
data is collected by sensor arrays mounted on GPS-equipped combine
harvesters. These arrays consist of real-time sensors that measure
everything from chlorophyll levels to plant water status, along with
multispectral imagery. This data is used in conjunction with satellite
imagery by variable rate technology (VRT) including seeders, sprayers,
etc. to optimally distribute resources. However, recent technological
advances have enabled the use of real-time sensors directly in soil,
which can wirelessly transmit data without the need of human
presence.Precision agriculture has also been enabled by unmanned aerial
vehicles that are relatively inexpensive and can be operated by novice
pilots. These agricultural drones can be equipped with multispectral or
RGB cameras to capture many images of a field that can be stitched
together using photogrammetric methods to create orthophotos. These
multispectral images contain multiple values per pixel in addition to
the traditional red, green blue values such as near infrared and
red-edge spectrum values used to process and analyze vegetative indexes
such as NDVI maps. These drones are capable of capturing imagery and
providing additional geographical references such as elevation, which
allows software to perform map algebra functions to build precise
topography maps. These topographic maps can be used to correlate crop
health with topography, the results of which can be used to optimize
crop inputs such as water, fertilizer or chemicals such as herbicides
and growth regulators through variable rate applications. History
Precision agriculture is a key component of the third wave of modern
agricultural revolutions. The first agricultural revolution was the
increase of mechanized agriculture, from 1900 to 1930. Each farmer
produced enough food to feed about 26 people during this time. The 1960s
prompted the Green Revolution with new methods of genetic modification,
which led to each farmer feeding about 156 people. It is expected that
by 2050, the global population will reach about 9.6 billion, and food
production must effectively double from current levels in order to feed
every mouth. With new technological advancements in the agricultural
revolution of precision farming, each farmer will be able to feed 265
people on the same acreage. Overview The first wave of the precision
agricultural revolution came in the forms of satellite and aerial
imagery, weather prediction, variable rate fertilizer application, and
crop health indicators. The second wave aggregates the machine data for
even more precise planting, topographical mapping, and soil
data.Precision agriculture aims to optimize field-level management with
regard to: crop science: by matching farming practices more closely to
crop needs (e.g. fertilizer inputs); environmental protection: by
reducing environmental risks and footprint of farming (e.g. limiting
leaching of nitrogen); economics: by boosting competitiveness through
more efficient practices (e.g. improved management of fertilizer usage
and other inputs).Precision agriculture also provides farmers with a
wealth of information to: build up a record of their farm improve
decision-making foster greater traceability enhance marketing of farm
products improve lease arrangements and relationship with landlords
enhance the inherent quality of farm products (e.g. protein level in
bread-flour wheat) Prescriptive planting Prescriptive planting is a type
of farming system that delivers data-driven planting advice that can
determine variable planting rates to accommodate varying conditions
across a single field, in order to maximize yield. It has been described
as \"Big Data on the farm.\" Monsanto, DuPont and others are launching
this technology in the US. Principles Precision agriculture uses many
tools but here are some of the basics: tractors, combines, sprayers,
planters, diggers, which are all considered auto-guidance systems. The
small devices on the equipment that uses GIS (geographic information
system) are what makes precision agriculture what it is. You can think
of the GIS system as the "brain." To be able to use precision
agriculture the equipment needs to be wired with the right technology
and data systems. More tools include Variable rate technology (VRT),
Global positioning system and Geographical information system, Grid
sampling, and remote sensors. Geolocating Geolocating a field enables
the farmer to overlay information gathered from analysis of soils and
residual nitrogen, and information on previous crops and soil
resistivity. Geolocation is done in two ways The field is delineated
using an in-vehicle GPS receiver as the farmer drives a tractor around
the field. The field is delineated on a basemap derived from aerial or
satellite imagery. The base images must have the right level of
resolution and geometric quality to ensure that geolocation is
sufficiently accurate. Variables Intra and inter-field variability may
result from a number of factors. These include climatic conditions
(hail, drought, rain, etc.), soils (texture, depth, nitrogen levels),
cropping practices (no-till farming), weeds and disease. Permanent
indicators---chiefly soil indicators---provide farmers with information
about the main environmental constants. Point indicators allow them to
track a crop\'s status, i.e., to see whether diseases are developing, if
the crop is suffering from water stress, nitrogen stress, or lodging,
whether it has been damaged by ice and so on. This information may come
from weather stations and other sensors (soil electrical resistivity,
detection with the naked eye, satellite imagery, etc.). Soil resistivity
measurements combined with soil analysis make it possible to measure
moisture content. Soil resistivity is also a relatively simple and cheap
measurement. Strategies Using soil maps, farmers can pursue two
strategies to adjust field inputs: Predictive approach: based on
analysis of static indicators (soil, resistivity, field history, etc.)
during the crop cycle. Control approach: information from static
indicators is regularly updated during the crop cycle by: sampling:
weighing biomass, measuring leaf chlorophyll content, weighing fruit,
etc. remote sensing: measuring parameters like temperature (air/soil),
humidity (air/soil/leaf), wind or stem diameter is possible thanks to
Wireless Sensor Networks and Internet of things (IoT) proxy-detection:
in-vehicle sensors measure leaf status; this requires the farmer to
drive around the entire field. aerial or satellite remote sensing:
multispectral imagery is acquired and processed to derive maps of crop
biophysical parameters, including indicators of disease. Airborne
instruments are able to measure the amount of plant cover and to
distinguish between crops and weeds.Decisions may be based on
decision-support models (crop simulation models and recommendation
models) based on big data, but in the final analysis it is up to the
farmer to decide in terms of business value and impacts on the
environment- a role being takenover by artificial intelligence (AI)
systems based on machine learning and artificial neural networks. It is
important to realize why PA technology is or is not adopted, \"for PA
technology adoption to occur the farmer has to perceive the technology
as useful and easy to use. It might be insufficient to have positive
outside data on the economic benefits of PA technology as perceptions of
farmers have to reflect these economic considerations.\" Implementing
practices New information and communication technologies make field
level crop management more operational and easier to achieve for
farmers. Application of crop management decisions calls for agricultural
equipment that supports variable-rate technology (VRT), for example
varying seed density along with variable-rate application (VRA) of
nitrogen and phytosanitary products.Precision agriculture uses
technology on agricultural equipment (e.g. tractors, sprayers,
harvesters, etc.): positioning system (e.g. GPS receivers that use
satellite signals to precisely determine a position on the globe);
geographic information systems (GIS), i.e., software that makes sense of
all the available data; variable-rate farming equipment (seeder,
spreader). Usage around the world The concept of precision agriculture
first emerged in the United States in the early 1980s. In 1985,
researchers at the University of Minnesota varied lime inputs in crop
fields. It was also at this time that the practice of grid sampling
appeared (applying a fixed grid of one sample per hectare). Towards the
end of the 1980s, this technique was used to derive the first input
recommendation maps for fertilizers and pH corrections. The use of yield
sensors developed from new technologies, combined with the advent of GPS
receivers, has been gaining ground ever since. Today, such systems cover
several million hectares. In the American Midwest (US), it is associated
not with sustainable agriculture but with mainstream farmers who are
trying to maximize profits by spending money only in areas that require
fertilizer. This practice allows the farmer to vary the rate of
fertilizer across the field according to the need identified by GPS
guided Grid or Zone Sampling. Fertilizer that would have been spread in
areas that don\'t need it can be placed in areas that do, thereby
optimizing its use. Around the world, precision agriculture developed at
a varying pace. Precursor nations were the United States, Canada and
Australia. In Europe, the United Kingdom was the first to go down this
path, followed closely by France, where it first appeared in 1997--1998.
In Latin America the leading country is Argentina, where it was
introduced in the middle 1990s with the support of the National
Agricultural Technology Institute. Brazil established a state-owned
enterprise, Embrapa, to research and develop sustainable agriculture.
The development of GPS and variable-rate spreading techniques helped to
anchor precision farming management practices. Today, less than 10% of
France\'s farmers are equipped with variable-rate systems. Uptake of GPS
is more widespread, but this hasn\'t stopped them using precision
agriculture services, which supplies field-level recommendation
maps.While digital technologies can transform the landscape of
agricultural machinery, making mechanization both more precise and more
accessible, non-mechanized production is still dominant in many low- and
middle-income countries, especially in sub-Saharan Africa. Research on
precision agriculture for non-mechanized production is increasing and so
is its adoption. Examples include the AgroCares hand-held soil scanner,
uncrewed aerial vehicle (UAV) services (also known as drones), and GNSS
to map field boundaries and establish land tenure. However, it is not
clear how many agricultural producers actually use digital
technologies.Precision livestock farming supports farmers in real-time
by continuously monitoring and controlling animal productivity,
environmental impacts, and health and welfare parameters. Sensors
attached to animals or to barn equipment operate climate control and
monitor animals' health status, movement and needs. For example, cows
can be tagged with the electronic identification (EID) that allows a
milking robot to access a database of udder coordinates for specific
cows. Global automatic milking system sales have increased over recent
years, but adoption is likely mostly in Northern Europe, and likely
almost absent in low- and middle-income countries. Automated feeding
machines for both cows and poultry also exist, but data and evidence
regarding their adoption trends and drivers is likewise scarce.The
economic and environmental benefits of precision agriculture have also
been confirmed in China, but China is lagging behind countries such as
Europe and the United States because the Chinese agricultural system is
characterized by small-scale family-run farms, which makes the adoption
rate of precision agriculture lower than other countries. Therefore,
China is trying to better introduce precision agriculture technology
into its own country and reduce some risks, paving the way for China\'s
technology to develop precision agriculture in the future. Economic and
environmental impacts Precision agriculture, as the name implies, means
application of precise and correct amount of inputs like water,
fertilizer, pesticides etc. at the correct time to the crop for
increasing its productivity and maximizing its yields. Precision
agriculture management practices can significantly reduce the amount of
nutrient and other crop inputs used while boosting yields. Farmers thus
obtain a return on their investment by saving on water, pesticide, and
fertilizer costs. The second, larger-scale benefit of targeting inputs
concerns environmental impacts. Applying the right amount of chemicals
in the right place and at the right time benefits crops, soils and
groundwater, and thus the entire crop cycle. Consequently, precision
agriculture has become a cornerstone of sustainable agriculture, since
it respects crops, soils and farmers. Sustainable agriculture seeks to
assure a continued supply of food within the ecological, economic and
social limits required to sustain production in the long term. A 2013
article tried to show that precision agriculture can help farmers in
developing countries like India.Precision agriculture reduces the
pressure of agriculture on the environment by increasing the efficiency
of machinery and putting it into use. For example, the use of remote
management devices such as GPS reduces fuel consumption for agriculture,
while variable rate application of nutrients or pesticides can
potentially reduce the use of these inputs, thereby saving costs and
reducing harmful runoff into the waterways.GPS also reduces the amount
of compaction to the ground by following previously made guidance lines.
This will also allow for less time in the field and reduce the
environmental impact of the equipment and chemicals. Emerging
technologies Precision agriculture is an application of breakthrough
digital farming technologies. Over \$4.6 billion has been invested in
agriculture tech companies---sometimes called agtech. Robots
Self-steering tractors have existed for some time now, as John Deere
equipment works like a plane on autopilot. The tractor does most of the
work, with the farmer stepping in for emergencies. Technology is
advancing towards driverless machinery programmed by GPS to spread
fertilizer or plow land. Autonomy of technology is driven by the
demanding need of diagnoses, often difficult to accomplish solely by
hands-on farmer-operated machinery. In many instances of high rates of
production, manual adjustments cannot sustain. Other innovations
include, partly solar powered, machines/robots that identify weeds and
precisely kill them with a dose of a herbicide or lasers.Agricultural
robots, also known as AgBots, already exist, but advanced harvesting
robots are being developed to identify ripe fruits, adjust to their
shape and size, and carefully pluck them from branches. Drones and
satellite imagery Drone and satellite technology are used in precision
farming. This often occurs when drones take high quality images while
satellites capture the bigger picture. Aerial photography from light
aircraft can be combined with data from satellite records to predict
future yields based on the current level of field biomass. Aggregated
images can create contour maps to track where water flows, determine
variable-rate seeding, and create yield maps of areas that were more or
less productive. Super resolution enhancement methods are seeing
increased use in crop disease surveillance from low flying aircraft.
Klapp et al. 2021 demonstrates a significantly improved infrared
super-resolution method using a convolutional neural network. The
Internet of things The Internet of things is the network of physical
objects outfitted with electronics that enable data collection and
aggregation. IoT comes into play with the development of sensors and
farm-management software. For example, farmers can spectroscopically
measure nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium in liquid manure, which is
notoriously inconsistent. They can then scan the ground to see where
cows have already urinated and apply fertilizer to only the spots that
need it. This cuts fertilizer use by up to 30%. Moisture sensors in the
soil determine the best times to remotely water plants. The irrigation
systems can be programmed to switch which side of tree trunk they water
based on the plant\'s need and rainfall.Innovations are not just limited
to plants---they can be used for the welfare of animals. Cattle can be
outfitted with internal sensors to keep track of stomach acidity and
digestive problems. External sensors track movement patterns to
determine the cow\'s health and fitness, sense physical injuries, and
identify the optimal times for breeding. All this data from sensors can
be aggregated and analyzed to detect trends and patterns. As another
example, monitoring technology can be used to make beekeeping more
efficient. Honeybees are of significant economic value and provide a
vital service to agriculture by pollinating a variety of crops.
Monitoring of a honeybee colony\'s health via wireless temperature,
humidity and CO2 sensors helps to improve the productivity of bees, and
to read early warnings in the data that might threaten the very survival
of an entire hive. Smartphone applications Smartphone and tablet
applications are becoming increasingly popular in precision agriculture.
Smartphones come with many useful applications already installed,
including the camera, microphone, GPS, and accelerometer. There are also
applications made dedicated to various agriculture applications such as
field mapping, tracking animals, obtaining weather and crop information,
and more. They are easily portable, affordable, and have high computing
power. Machine learning Machine learning is commonly used in conjunction
with drones, robots, and internet of things devices. It allows for the
input of data from each of these sources. The computer then processes
this information and sends the appropriate actions back to these
devices. This allows for robots to deliver the perfect amount of
fertilizer or for IoT devices to provide the perfect quantity of water
directly to the soil. Machine learning may also provide predictions to
farmers at the point of need, such as the contents of plant-available
nitrogen in soil, to guide fertilization planning. As more agriculture
becomes ever more digital, machine learning will underpin efficient and
precise farming with less manual labour. Conferences InfoAg Conference
European conference on Precision Agriculture (ECPA) (biennial)
International Conference on Precision Agriculture (ICPA) (biennial) See
also Sources This article incorporates text from a free content work.
Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0 (license statement/permission). Text taken
from In Brief to The State of Food and Agriculture 2022 -- Leveraging
automation in agriculture for transforming agrifood systems​, FAO, FAO.
To learn how to add open license text to Wikipedia articles, please see
this how-to page. For information on reusing text from Wikipedia, please
see the terms of use. Notes External links Media related to Precision
farming at Wikimedia Commons Precision agriculture, IBM
