Rakesh Agrawal (हिन्दी - राकेश अग्रवाल) is a computer scientist who until
recently was a Technical Fellow at the Microsoft Search Labs. Rakesh is
well known for developing fundamental data mining concepts and
technologies and pioneering key concepts in data privacy, including
Hippocratic Database, Sovereign Information Sharing, and
Privacy-Preserving Data Mining. IBM\'s commercial data mining product,
Intelligent Miner, grew out of his work. His research has been
incorporated into other IBM products, including DB2 Mining Extender, DB2
OLAP Server and WebSphere Commerce Server, and has influenced several
other commercial and academic products, prototypes and applications. His
other technical contributions include Polyglot object-oriented type
system, Alert active database system, Ode (Object database and
environment), Alpha (extension of relational databases with generalized
transitive closure), Nest distributed system, transaction management,
and database machines. Prior to joining Microsoft in March 2006, Rakesh
was an IBM Fellow and led the Quest group at the IBM Almaden Research
Center. Earlier, he was with the Bell Laboratories, Murray Hill from
1983 to 1989. He also worked for three years at a leading Indian
company, the Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd. He received his M.S. and
Ph.D. degrees in Computer Science from the University of
Wisconsin-Madison in 1983. He also holds a B.E. degree in Electronics
and Communication Engineering from IIT-Roorkee, and a two-year Post
Graduate Diploma in Industrial Engineering from the National Institute
of Industrial Engineering (NITIE), Bombay. Research and papers Rakesh
has been granted more than 55 patents. He has published more than 150
research papers, many of them considered seminal. He has written the 1st
as well as 2nd highest cited of all papers in the fields of databases
and data mining (13th and 15th most cited across all computer science as
of February 2007 in CiteSeer). Wikipedia lists one of his papers Fast
algorithms for mining association rules co-authored with Ramakrishnan
Srikant published on VLDB in 1994 as one of the most influential
database papers. His papers have been cited more than 6500 times, with
more than 15 of them receiving more than 100 citations each. He is the
most cited author in the field of database systems. His work has been
featured in the New York Times Year in Review, New York Times Science
section, and several other publications. References External links
Official website
