RapidMiner is a data science platform designed for enterprises that
analyses the collective impact of organizations' employees, expertise
and data. Rapid Miner\'s data science platform is intended to support
many analytics users across a broad AI lifecycle. It was acquired by
Altair Engineering in September 2022. History RapidMiner, formerly known
as YALE (Yet Another Learning Environment), was developed starting in
2001 by Ralf Klinkenberg, Ingo Mierswa, and Simon Fischer at the
Artificial Intelligence Unit of the Technical University of Dortmund.
Starting in 2006, its development was driven by Rapid-I, a company
founded by Ingo Mierswa and Ralf Klinkenberg in the same year. In 2007,
the name of the software was changed from YALE to RapidMiner. In 2013,
the company rebranded from Rapid-I to RapidMiner. Description RapidMiner
uses a client/server model with the server offered either on-premises or
in public or private cloud infrastructures. According to Bloor Research,
RapidMiner provides 99% of an advanced analytical solution through
template-based frameworks that speed delivery and reduce errors by
nearly eliminating the need to write code. RapidMiner provides data
mining and machine learning procedures including: data loading and
transformation (ETL), data preprocessing and visualization, predictive
analytics and statistical modeling, evaluation, and deployment.
RapidMiner is written in the Java programming language. RapidMiner
provides a GUI to design and execute analytical workflows. Those
workflows are called "Processes" in RapidMiner and they consist of
multiple "Operators". Each operator performs a single task within the
process, and the output of each operator forms the input of the next
one. Alternatively, the engine can be called from other programs or used
as an API. Individual functions can be called from the command line.
RapidMiner provides learning schemes, models and algorithms and can be
extended using R and Python scripts.RapidMiner functionality can be
extended with additional plugins which are made available via RapidMiner
Marketplace. The RapidMiner Marketplace provides a platform for
developers to create data analysis algorithms and publish them to the
community.The RapidMiner Studio Free Edition, which is limited to one
logical processor and 10,000 data rows, is available under the AGPL
license, Adoption In 2019, Gartner placed RapidMiner in the leader
quadrant of its Magic Quadrant for Data Science & Machine Learning
Platforms for the sixth year in a row. The report noted that RapidMiner
provides deep and broad modeling capabilities for automated end-to-end
model development. In the 2018 annual software poll, KDnuggets readers
voted RapidMiner as one of the most popular data analytics software with
the poll's respondents citing the software package as the tool they use.
RapidMiner has received millions of total downloads and has over 400,000
users including BMW, Intel, Cisco, GE, and Samsung as paying customers.
RapidMiner claims to be the market leader in the software for data
science platforms against competitors such as SAS and IBM. Developer
About 50 developer\'s worldwide participated in the development of the
open source RapidMiner with the majority of the contributors being
employees of RapidMiner. The company that develops RapidMiner received a
\$16 million Series C funding with participation from venture capital
firms Nokia Growth Partner\'s, Ascent Venture Partner\'s, Longworth
Venture Partner\'s, Earlybird Venture Capital and OpenOcean. OpenOcean
partner Michael \"Monty\" Widenius is a founder of MySQL. References
External links Official website
