The Raytheon Company was a major U.S. defense contractor and industrial
corporation with manufacturing concentrations in weapons and military
and commercial electronics. It was previously involved in corporate and
special-mission aircraft until early 2007. Raytheon was the world\'s
largest producer of guided missiles. In April 2020, the company merged
with United Technologies Corporation to form Raytheon
Technologies.Established in 1922, the company reincorporated in 1928 and
adopted its present name in 1959. During 2018, the company had around
67,000 employees worldwide and annual revenues of approximately
US\$25.35 billion. More than 90% of Raytheon\'s revenues were obtained
from military contracts and, as of 2012, it was the fifth-largest
military contractor in the world. As of 2015, it was the third largest
defense contractor in the United States by defense revenue.In 2003,
Raytheon\'s headquarters moved from Lexington, Massachusetts, to
Waltham, Massachusetts. The company had previously been headquartered in
Cambridge, Massachusetts, from 1922 to 1928, Newton, Massachusetts, from
1928 to 1941, Waltham from 1941 to 1961 and Lexington from 1961 to 2003.
History Early years In 1922, two former Tufts University School of
Engineering, roommates Laurence K. Marshall and Vannevar Bush, along
with scientist Charles G. Smith, founded the American Appliance Company
in Cambridge, Massachusetts. Its focus, which was originally on new
refrigeration technology, soon shifted to electronics. The company\'s
first product was a gaseous (helium) voltage-regulator tube that was
based on Charles Smith\'s earlier astronomical research of the star Zeta
Puppis. The electron tube was christened with the name Raytheon (a
compound of Old French and Greek meaning \'light from the gods\') and
was used in a battery eliminator, a type of radio-receiver power supply
that plugged into the power grid in place of large batteries. This made
it possible to convert household alternating current to a regulated,
high voltage direct current for radios and thus eliminate the need for
expensive, short-lived batteries. In 1925, the company changed its name
to Raytheon Manufacturing Company and began marketing its rectifier,
under the Raytheon brand name, with commercial success. In 1928 Raytheon
merged with Q.R.S. Company, an American manufacturer of electron tubes
and switches, to form the successor of the same name, Raytheon
Manufacturing Company. By the 1930s, it had already grown to become one
of the world\'s largest vacuum tube manufacturing companies. In 1933 it
diversified by acquiring Acme-Delta Company, a producer of transformers,
power equipment, and electronic auto parts. During World War II Early in
World War II, physicists in the United Kingdom invented the magnetron, a
specialized microwave-generating electron tube that markedly improved
the capability of radar to detect enemy aircraft. American companies
were then sought by the US government to perfect and mass-produce the
magnetron for ground-based, airborne, and shipborne radar systems, and,
with support from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology\'s Radiation
Laboratory (recently formed to investigate microwave radar), Raytheon
received a contract to build the devices. Within a few months of being
awarded the contract, Raytheon had already begun to mass manufacture
magnetron tubes for use in radar sets and then complete radar systems.
At war\'s end in 1945 the company was responsible for about 80 percent
of all magnetrons manufactured. During the war Raytheon also pioneered
the production of shipboard radar systems, particularly for submarine
detection. Raytheon ranked 71st among United States corporations in the
value of World War II military production contracts.Raytheon\'s research
on the magnetron tube revealed the potential of microwaves to cook food.
In 1945, Raytheon\'s Percy Spencer invented the microwave oven by
discovering that the magnetron could rapidly heat food. In 1947, the
company demonstrated the Radarange microwave oven for commercial
use.Raytheon was also a contractor for the mass-production of the
newly-invented miniature shock-resistant vacuum tubes used in proximity
fuses. These tubes were difficult to manufacture and required rigorous
attention to detail to avoid failure of the fuse. After World War II In
1946, the company expanded its electronics capability through
acquisitions that included the Submarine Signal Company (founded in
1901), a leading manufacturer of maritime safety equipment. With its
broadened capabilities, Raytheon developed the first guidance system for
a missile that could intercept a flying target. In 1948 Charles Francis
Adams IV was appointed to be the new President of the company and served
until 1960. In 1948, Raytheon began to manufacture guided missiles. In
1950, its Lark missile became the first such weapon to destroy a target
aircraft in flight. Raytheon then received military contracts to develop
the air-to-air Sparrow and ground-to-air Hawk missiles, projects that
received impetus from the Korean War. In later decades, it remained a
major producer of missiles, such as the Patriot antimissile missile and
the air-to-air Phoenix missile. Raytheon made a foray into computers,
producing the RAYDAC computer for the U.S.Navy which became operational
in 1953. \"Unfortunately, the machine was technically obsolete by the
time it was operational.\" Also in 1953 the company began work on a
follow-on, the RAYCOM, which was never completed. In 1954 it entered
into a joint venture with Honeywell to form the Datamatic corporation.
However it sold its interest to Honeywell a year later, before
introduction of the DATAmatic 1000 system. In 1958, Raytheon acquired
the marine electronics company Applied Electronics Company, which
significantly increased its strength in commercial marine navigation and
radio gear, as well as less-expensive Japanese suppliers of products
such as marine/weather band radios and direction-finding gear. In the
same year, it changed its name to Raytheon Company. During the post-war
years, Raytheon also made generally low- to medium-powered radio and
television transmitters and related equipment for the commercial market,
but the high-powered market was solidly in the hands of larger,
better-financed competitors such as Continental Electronics, General
Electric and Radio Corporation of America. In the 1950s, Raytheon began
manufacturing transistors, including the CK722, priced and marketed to
hobbyists. In 1961, the British electronics company A.C. Cossor merged
with Raytheon, following its sale by Philips. The new Company\'s name
was Raytheon Cossor. The Cossor side of the organisation is still
current in the Raytheon group as of 2010. In 1965, it acquired Amana
Refrigeration, Inc., a manufacturer of refrigerators and air
conditioners. Using the Amana brand name and its distribution channels,
Raytheon began selling the first countertop household microwave oven in
1967 and became a dominant manufacturer in the microwave oven business.
In 1966, the company entered the educational publishing business with
the acquisition of D.C. Heath and Company, marketing an influential
physics textbook developed by the Physical Science Study Committee.
Raytheon also manufactured the Apollo Guidance Computer, which was
introduced that year and flew aboard all NASA Project Apollo missions.
In the late 1970s, Raytheon acquired McGraw-Edison\'s appliances
division notable for the Speed Queen line of washers and dryers. 1980s
In 1980, Raytheon acquired Beech Aircraft Corporation, a leading
manufacturer of general aviation aircraft founded in 1932 by Walter H.
Beech. In 1993 the company expanded its aircraft activities by adding
the Hawker line of business jets by acquiring Corporate Jets Inc., the
business jet product line of British Aerospace (now BAE Systems). These
two entities were merged in 1994 to become the Raytheon Aircraft
Company. In the first quarter of 2007 Raytheon sold its aircraft
operations, which subsequently operated as Hawker Beechcraft, and since
2014 have been units of Textron Aviation. The product line of
Raytheon\'s aircraft subsidiary included business jets such as the
Hawker 800XP and Hawker 4000, the Beechjet 400A, and the Premier I; the
popular King Air series of twin turboprops; and piston-engine aircraft
such as the Bonanza. Its special-mission aircraft included the
single-turboprop T-6A Texan II, which the United States Air Force and
United States Navy had chosen as their primary training aircraft. 1990s
In 1991, during the Persian Gulf War, Raytheon\'s Patriot missile
received great international exposure, resulting in a substantial
increase in sales for the company outside the United States. In an
effort to establish leadership in the defense electronics business,
Raytheon purchased in quick succession Dallas-based E-Systems (1995);
Chrysler Corporation\'s defense electronics and aircraft-modification
businesses, which had previously acquired companies such as Electrospace
systems (1996) (portions of these businesses were later sold to L-3
Communications), and the defense unit of Texas Instruments, Defense
Systems & Electronics Group (1997). Also in 1997, Raytheon acquired the
aerospace and defense business of Hughes Aircraft Company from Hughes
Electronics Corporation, a subsidiary of General Motors, which included
a number of product lines previously purchased by Hughes Electronics,
including the former General Dynamics missile business (Pomona
facility), the defense portion of Delco Electronics (Delco Systems
Operations), and Magnavox Electronic Systems.Raytheon also divested
itself of several nondefense businesses in the 1990s, including Amana
Refrigeration, Raytheon Commercial Laundry (purchased by Bain Capital\'s
Alliance Laundry Systems), and Seismograph Service Ltd (sold to
Schlumberger-Geco-Prakla). On October 12, 1999, Raytheon exited the
personal rapid transit (PRT) business as it terminated its PRT 2000
system due to the high cost of development and the lack of interest.
2000s In November 2007, Raytheon purchased Sarcos for an undisclosed
sum, seeking to expand into robotics research and production.In
September 2009, Raytheon entered into an agreement to acquire BBN
Technologies. The acquisition was completed on October 29, 2009. 2010s
In December 2010, Applied Signal Technology agreed to be acquired by
Raytheon for \$490 million.In October 2014, Raytheon beat rivals
Lockheed Martin and Northrop Grumman for a contract to build 3DELRR, a
next-generation long-range radar system, for the US Air Force worth an
estimated \$1 billion.The contract award was immediately protested by
Raytheon\'s competitors, Lockheed Martin and Northrop Grumman. After
re-evaluating the bids following the protests, the US Air Force decided
to delay awarding the 3DELRR EMD contract until 2017 and was to issue an
amended solicitation at the end of July 2016. In 2017 the Air Force
again awarded the contract to Raytheon.In May 2015, Raytheon acquired
cybersecurity firm Websense, Inc. from Vista Equity Partners for \$1.9
billion and combined it with RCP, formerly part of its IIS segment to
form Raytheon\|Websense. In October 2015, Raytheon\|Websense acquired
Foreground Security, a provider of security operations centers, managed
security service solutions and cybersecurity professional services, for
\$62 million. In January 2016, Raytheon\|Websense acquired the firewall
provider Stonesoft from Intel Security for an undisclosed amount and
renamed itself to Forcepoint.In July 2016, Poland\'s Defence Minister
Antoni Macierewicz planned to sign a letter of intent with Raytheon for
a \$5.6 billion deal to upgrade its Patriot missile-defence shield.In
2017, Saudi Arabia signed business deals worth billions of dollars with
multiple American companies, including Raytheon.In July 2019, Qatar\'s
Ministry of Defense committed to acquire Raytheon's NASAM and Patriot
missile defense systems. 2020s In February 2020, Raytheon completed the
first radar antenna array for the US Army\'s new missile defense radar,
known as the Lower Tier Air and Missile Defense Sensor (LTAMDS), to
replace the service\'s Patriot air and missile defense system sensor.In
April 2020, the company merged with United Technologies Corporation to
form Raytheon Technologies. The merged company is headquartered in
Waltham rather than UTC\'s base in Farmington, Connecticut. Finances For
the fiscal year 2017, Raytheon reported earnings of US\$2.024 billion,
with an annual revenue of US\$25.348 billion, an increase of 5.1% over
the previous fiscal cycle. Raytheon\'s shares traded at over \$164 per
share, and its market capitalization was valued at over US\$51.7 billion
in November 2018. Company structure Businesses Raytheon is composed of
five major business divisions: Integrated Defense Systems---based in
Tewksbury, Massachusetts; Ralph Acaba, President Intelligence,
Information and Services---based in Dulles, Virginia; Dave Wajsgras,
President Missile Systems---based in Tucson, Arizona; Wesley Kremer,
President Space and Airborne Systems---based in McKinney, Texas; Roy
Azevedo, President Forcepoint---based Austin, Texas; CEO, Matt
MoynahanRaytheon's businesses are supported by several dedicated
international operations including: Raytheon Australia; Raytheon Canada
Limited; operations in Japan; Raytheon Microelectronics in Spain;
Raytheon UK (formerly Raytheon Systems Limited); and
ThalesRaytheonSystems, France. Strategic Business Areas In recent years,
Raytheon has expanded into other fields while redefining some of its
core business activities. Raytheon has identified five key \'Strategic
Business Areas\' where it is focusing its expertise and resources:
Homeland Security Missile Defense Precision Engagement Intelligence,
Surveillance, Reconnaissance (ISR) Process Improvement (Raytheon Lean6)
Leadership In March 2014, Thomas Kennedy was named CEO of Raytheon
Company. Kennedy succeeded William H. Swanson, who was CEO since 2003.
Swanson remained as Chairman through September 2014 when Kennedy became
Chairman as well as CEO. Other current and former members of the board
of directors of Raytheon were: Vernon Clark, James E. Cartwright, John
Deutch, Stephen J. Hadley, George R. Oliver, Frederic Poses, Michael
Ruettgers, Ronald Skates, William Spivey, and Linda Stuntz. Ownership As
of December 2014, according to filed reports, the top ten institutional
shareholders of Raytheon are Wellington Management Company, Vanguard
Group, State Street Corporation, Barrow, Hanley, Mewhinney & Strauss,
BlackRock Institutional Trust Company, BlackRock Advisors, Bank of
America, Bank of New York Mellon, Deutsche Bank and Macquarie Group.
Products and services Overview Raytheon provides electronics, mission
systems integration and other capabilities in the areas of sensing;
effects; and command, control, communications and intelligence systems;
as well as a broad range of mission support services. Raytheon\'s
electronics and defense-systems units produce air-, sea-, and
land-launched missiles, aircraft radar systems, weapons sights and
targeting systems, communication and battle-management systems, and
satellite components. Air traffic control systems FIRSTplus Air Traffic
Control Simulator AutoTrac III ATM System STARS Radars and sensors
Raytheon is a developer and manufacturer of radars (including AESAs),
electro-optical sensors, and other advanced electronics systems for
airborne, naval and ground based military applications. Examples
include: APG-63/APG-70 radars for the F-15 Eagle APG-65/APG-73/APG-79
radars for the F/A-18 Hornet APG-77 radar for the F-22 Raptor (joint
development with Northrop Grumman) APG-84 RACR radar ALE-50 towed decoy
ALR-67(V)3 and ALR-69A radar warning receivers AN/APQ-181 (AESA upgrade
currently in development), for the B-2 Spirit bomber Integrated Sensor
Suite (ISS) for the RQ-4 Global Hawk UAV ASQ-228 ATFLIR (Advanced
Targeting Forward-Looking Infrared) pod TPQ-36/TPQ-37 Firefinder and
MPQ-64 Sentinel mobile battlefield radars F-16 RACR, designed for the
F-16 using AESA technology SLQ-32 shipboard EW system Large fixed-site
radars such as PAVE PAWS, BMEWS, and the Missile Defense Agency X-band
Radar (XBR) Satellite sensors Raytheon, often in conjunction with
Boeing, Lockheed Martin or Northrop Grumman, is also heavily involved in
the satellite sensor business. Much of its Space and Airborne Systems
division in El Segundo, CA is devoted to this, a business it inherited
from Hughes. Examples of programs include: Space Tracking and
Surveillance System (STSS), being developed for the Ballistic Missile
Defense. Raytheon is building the sensor payload. Additionally, the El
Segundo site is the company center of excellence for the development and
production of laser products. Raytheon company\'s Navy Multiband
Terminal (NMT) is the first advanced, next-generation satellite
communications (SATCOM) system to successfully log on to and communicate
with the U.S. government\'s Milstar SATCOM system using low and medium
data rate waveforms. The system provides naval commanders and sailors
with greater data capacity, as well as improved protection against enemy
intercept and jamming. Visible Infrared Imaging Radiometer Suite
(VIIRS), was developed by Raytheon Space and Airborne Sensors and is
currently in operation on the Suomi NPP satellite. Future deliveries of
VIIRS will fly onboard JPSS to continue the operational space based
climate and weather sensing legacy of the MODIS sensors. Communications
Raytheon\'s Universal Control System (UCS) is an unmanned aerial system
(UAS) \"cockpit\" that improves operator awareness and efficiency, while
providing the ability to control multiple unmanned aircraft, and reduce
potential accidents. The company also makes several software radio and
digital communication systems for military applications such as
Cooperative Engagement Capability (CEC), is participating in Navy-Marine
Corps Intranet (NMCI), ECHELON and the Joint Tactical Terminal (JTT)
programs. Digital Multimedia Watchdog, a tool used by the FBI to record
phone calls and Internet communications. Radioactive materials detection
system As part of the company\'s growing homeland security business and
strategic focus, Raytheon has teamed with other contractors to develop
an Advance Spectroscopic Portal (ASP) to allow border officials to view
and identify radioactive materials in vehicles and shipping containers
more effectively. Semiconductors Raytheon also manufactures
semiconductors for the electronics industry in sites in the US and UK.
In the late 20th century it produced a wide range of integrated circuits
and other components, but as of 2003 its US semiconductor business
specializes in gallium arsenide (GaAs) components for radio
communications as well as infrared detectors. It is also making efforts
to develop gallium nitride (GaN) components for next-generation radars
and radios. The UK arm specialized in CMOS on silicon carbide (SiC)
development and foundry work but is no longer taking on new orders,
having been on the premises for 57 years. Missile defense systems In the
framework of Ground-Based Midcourse Defense, Raytheon is developing a
Ground Based Interceptor (GBI) that includes a booster missile and a
kinetic Exoatmospheric Kill Vehicle (EKV), along with several key radar
components, such as the Sea-Based X-Band Radar (SBX) and the Upgraded
Early Warning Radar (UEWR). Missiles Raytheon is a developer of missiles
and related missile defense systems. These include: AGM-65 Maverick
AGM-88 HARM AGM-129 Advanced Cruise Missile AGM-154 Joint Standoff
Weapon AIM-7 Sparrow AIM-9 Sidewinder AIM-120 AMRAAM BGM-71 TOW BGM-109
Tomahawk FGM-148 Javelin FIM-92 Stinger GBU-28 Paveway III Peregrine
air-to-air missile MIM-23 Hawk MIM-104 Patriot RIM-7 Sea Sparrow RIM-161
Standard Missile 3 RIM-162 ESSM Pyros Hi-tech simulators In a jointly
managed project with Hughes Aircraft Co., Raytheon developed the Air
Warfare Simulation (AWSIM2), currently used by the USAF for battle staff
training at simulation centers worldwide. Raytheon also produces and
runs the ABACUS (Advanced BAttlespace CompUter Simulation) or Higher
Formation Trainer (HFT) for training HQs from small specialist units up
to corps level. Training Services and Learning Outsourcing Raytheon
Professional Services (RPS) is a global leader in training services and
learning outsourcing for over 75 years. Clients are offered training
tailored to their needs. The scope of each contract can vary from
short-term training initiatives and projects to multi-year outsourcing
engagements for some or all of a client's training function. Services
include: (1) Performance Consulting & Learning Strategy Development, (2)
Training Design, Development & Delivery, (3) Learning Technologies and
(4)Training Administration Raytheon Six Sigma Raytheon Six Sigma is the
company\'s disciplined, knowledge-based approach designed to increase
productivity, grow the business, enhance customer satisfaction and build
a customer culture that embraces all of these goals. Daniel Burnham
brought Six Sigma to Raytheon from AlliedSignal in 1998. This internal
service provides six steps that guide projects to completion, the six
steps being: visualize, commit, prioritize, characterize, improve, and
achieve. Raytheon mentions in its annual reports the benefits it has
enjoyed through Six Sigma. It has gained USD \$3.8 billion in financial
benefit and has set a common language and culture across the company.
Environmental record Two lawsuits were filed against a Raytheon Company
plant in St. Petersburg, Florida, due to concern with health risks,
property values, and contamination in April 2008. Raytheon was given
until the end of the month to independently test whether or not the
groundwater that originated from its area was contaminated. According to
the Florida Department of Environmental Protection (DEP), the
groundwater contained carcinogenic contaminants, including
trichloroethylene, 1,4-dioxane, and vinyl chloride. The DEP also
reported that the clouds contained other toxins, such as lead and
toluene.In 1995, Raytheon acquired Dallas-based E-Systems, including a
site in St. Petersburg, Florida. In November 1991, prior to Raytheon\'s
acquisition, contamination had been discovered at the E-Systems site.
Soil and groundwater had been contaminated with the volatile organic
compounds trichloroethylene and 1,4-Dioxane. In 2005, groundwater
monitoring indicated polluted groundwater was moving into areas outside
the site. According to DEP documentation, Raytheon has tested wells on
its site since 1996 but had not delivered a final report; therefore, it
was given a deadline on May 31, 2008 to investigate its groundwater.
Contamination in the area has not affected anyone\'s drinking water
supply or health, yet due to negative local media coverage lawsuits are
being filed with claims against Raytheon citing decreases in property
values.In another case, Raytheon was ordered by the Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) to treat groundwater at the Tucson Plant
(acquired during the merger with Hughes) in Arizona since Raytheon used
and disposed metals, chlorinated solvents, and other substances at the
plant since 1951. The EPA further required the installation and
operation of an oxidation process system to treat the solvents and make
the water safe to drink.On 9 August 2006, The Stream Contact Centre in
Derry, Northern Ireland, which had a contract with Raytheon at the time,
was attacked by protesters. They destroyed the computers, documents, and
mainframe of the office, and proceeded to occupy it for eight hours
prior to their arrest. The activists were charged with criminal damage
and affray. The trial of six of the accused began May 19, 2008, in the
Laganside Courts in Belfast. Colm Bryce, Gary Donnelly, Kieran
Gallagher, Michael Gallagher, Sean Heaton, Jimmy Kelly, Paddy McDaid and
Eamonn O\'Donnell were acquitted of all charges on 11 June, with Eamonn
McCann found guilty of the theft of two computer discs. See also
Raytheon 9 Tactical Control System Top 100 US Federal Contractors --
\$16.1 billion in FY2009 References External links Raytheon Company
website (Archived) Raytheon Company Semiconductor Division Files Kept to
Monitor the Electronics Industry, 1965--1986 (call number M0661; 11.5
linear ft.) are housed in the Department of Special Collections and
University Archives at Stanford University Libraries Direct political
contributions
