Robot learning is a research field at the intersection of machine
learning and robotics. It studies techniques allowing a robot to acquire
novel skills or adapt to its environment through learning algorithms.
The embodiment of the robot, situated in a physical embedding, provides
at the same time specific difficulties (e.g. high-dimensionality, real
time constraints for collecting data and learning) and opportunities for
guiding the learning process (e.g. sensorimotor synergies, motor
primitives). Example of skills that are targeted by learning algorithms
include sensorimotor skills such as locomotion, grasping, active object
categorization, as well as interactive skills such as joint manipulation
of an object with a human peer, and linguistic skills such as the
grounded and situated meaning of human language. Learning can happen
either through autonomous self-exploration or through guidance from a
human teacher, like for example in robot learning by imitation. Robot
learning can be closely related to adaptive control, reinforcement
learning as well as developmental robotics which considers the problem
of autonomous lifelong acquisition of repertoires of skills. While
machine learning is frequently used by computer vision algorithms
employed in the context of robotics, these applications are usually not
referred to as \"robot learning\". Projects Maya Cakmak, assistant
professor of computer science and engineering at the University of
Washington, is trying to create a robot that learns by imitating - a
technique called \"programming by demonstration\". A researcher shows it
a cleaning technique for the robot\'s vision system and it generalizes
the cleaning motion from the human demonstration as well as identifying
the \"state of dirt\" before and after cleaning.Similarly the Baxter
industrial robot can be taught how to do something by grabbing its arm
and showing it the desired movements. It can also use deep learning to
teach itself to grasp an unknown object. Sharing learned skills and
knowledge In Tellex\'s \"Million Object Challenge,\" the goal is robots
that learn how to spot and handle simple items and upload their data to
the cloud to allow other robots to analyze and use the
information.RoboBrain is a knowledge engine for robots which can be
freely accessed by any device wishing to carry out a task. The database
gathers new information about tasks as robots perform them, by searching
the Internet, interpreting natural language text, images, and videos,
object recognition as well as interaction. The project is led by
Ashutosh Saxena at Stanford University.RoboEarth is a project that has
been described as a \"World Wide Web for robots\" âˆ’ it is a network and
database repository where robots can share information and learn from
each other and a cloud for outsourcing heavy computation tasks. The
project brings together researchers from five major universities in
Germany, the Netherlands and Spain and is backed by the European
Union.Google Research, DeepMind, and Google X have decided to allow
their robots share their experiences. See also Developmental robotics
Cognitive robotics Evolutionary robotics References External links IEEE
RAS Technical Committee on Robot Learning (official IEEE website) IEEE
RAS Technical Committee on Robot Learning (TC members website) Robot
Learning at the Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems and the
Technical University Darmstadt Robot Learning at the Computational
Learning and Motor Control lab Humanoid Robot Learning at the Advanced
Telecommunication Research Center (ATR) (in English and Japanese)
Learning Algorithms and Systems Laboratory at EPFL (LASA) Robot Learning
at the Cognitive Robotics Lab of Juergen Schmidhuber at IDSIA and
Technical University of Munich The Humanoid Project: Peter Nordin,
Chalmers University of Technology Inria and Ensta ParisTech FLOWERS
team, France: Autonomous lifelong learning in developmental robotics
CITEC at University of Bielefeld, Germany Asada Laboratory, Department
of Adaptive Machine Systems, Graduate School of Engineering, Osaka
University, Japan The Laboratory for Perceptual Robotics, University of
Massachusetts Amherst Amherst, USA Centre for Robotics and Neural
Systems, Plymouth University Plymouth, United Kingdom Robot Learning Lab
at Carnegie Mellon University Project Learning Humanoid Robots at
University of Bonn Skilligent Robot Learning and Behavior Coordination
System (commercial product) Robot Learning class at Cornell University
Robot Learning and Interaction Lab at Italian Institute of Technology
Reinforcement learning for robotics Archived 2018-10-08 at the Wayback
Machine at Delft University of Technology
