Rule-based machine learning (RBML) is a term in computer science
intended to encompass any machine learning method that identifies,
learns, or evolves \'rules\' to store, manipulate or apply. The defining
characteristic of a rule-based machine learner is the identification and
utilization of a set of relational rules that collectively represent the
knowledge captured by the system. This is in contrast to other machine
learners that commonly identify a singular model that can be universally
applied to any instance in order to make a prediction.Rule-based machine
learning approaches include learning classifier systems, association
rule learning, artificial immune systems, and any other method that
relies on a set of rules, each covering contextual knowledge. While
rule-based machine learning is conceptually a type of rule-based system,
it is distinct from traditional rule-based systems, which are often
hand-crafted, and other rule-based decision makers. This is because
rule-based machine learning applies some form of learning algorithm to
automatically identify useful rules, rather than a human needing to
apply prior domain knowledge to manually construct rules and curate a
rule set. Rules Rules typically take the form of an \'{IF:THEN}
expression\', (e.g. {IF \'condition\' THEN \'result\'}, or as a more
specific example, {IF \'red\' AND \'octagon\' THEN \'stop-sign}). An
individual rule is not in itself a model, since the rule is only
applicable when its condition is satisfied. Therefore rule-based machine
learning methods typically comprise a set of rules, or knowledge base,
that collectively make up the prediction model. See also == References
==
