scikit-learn (formerly scikits.learn and also known as sklearn) is a
free software machine learning library for the Python programming
language. It features various classification, regression and clustering
algorithms including support-vector machines, random forests, gradient
boosting, k-means and DBSCAN, and is designed to interoperate with the
Python numerical and scientific libraries NumPy and SciPy. Scikit-learn
is a NumFOCUS fiscally sponsored project. Overview The scikit-learn
project started as scikits.learn, a Google Summer of Code project by
French data scientist David Cournapeau. The name of the project stems
from the notion that it is a \"SciKit\" (SciPy Toolkit), a separately
developed and distributed third-party extension to SciPy. The original
codebase was later rewritten by other developers. In 2010, contributors
Fabian Pedregosa, GaÃ«l Varoquaux, Alexandre Gramfort and Vincent Michel,
from the French Institute for Research in Computer Science and
Automation in Saclay, France, took leadership of the project and
released the first public version of the library on February 1, 2010. In
November 2012, scikit-learn as well as scikit-image, were described as
two of the \"well-maintained and popular\" scikits libraries. In 2019,
it was noted that scikit-learn is one of the most popular machine
learning libraries on GitHub. Implementation scikit-learn is largely
written in Python, and uses NumPy extensively for high-performance
linear algebra and array operations. Furthermore, some core algorithms
are written in Cython to improve performance. Support vector machines
are implemented by a Cython wrapper around LIBSVM; logistic regression
and linear support vector machines by a similar wrapper around
LIBLINEAR. In such cases, extending these methods with Python may not be
possible. scikit-learn integrates well with many other Python libraries,
such as Matplotlib and plotly for plotting, NumPy for array
vectorization, Pandas dataframes, SciPy, and many more. Version history
scikit-learn was initially developed by David Cournapeau as a Google
Summer of Code project in 2007. Later that year, Matthieu Brucher joined
the project and started to use it as a part of his thesis work. In 2010,
INRIA, the French Institute for Research in Computer Science and
Automation, got involved and the first public release (v0.1 beta) was
published in late January 2010. August 2013. scikit-learn 0.14 July
2014. scikit-learn 0.15.0 March 2015. scikit-learn 0.16.0 November 2015.
scikit-learn 0.17.0 September 2016. scikit-learn 0.18.0 July 2017.
scikit-learn 0.19.0 September 2018. scikit-learn 0.20.0 May 2019.
scikit-learn 0.21.0 December 2019. scikit-learn 0.22 May 2020.
scikit-learn 0.23.0 Jan 2021. scikit-learn 0.24 September 2021.
scikit-learn 1.0.0 September 2021. scikit-learn 1.0.0 October 2021.
scikit-learn 1.0.1 December 2021. scikit-learn 1.0.2 May 2022.
scikit-learn 1.1.0 May 2022. scikit-learn 1.1.1 August 2022.
scikit-learn 1.1.2 October 2022. scikit-learn 1.1.3 December 2022.
scikit-learn 1.2.0 January 2023. scikit-learn 1.2.1 March 2023.
scikit-learn 1.2.2 scikit-learn tools mlpy SpaCy NLTK Orange PyTorch
TensorFlow Infer.NET List of numerical analysis software References
External links Official website scikit-learn on GitHub
