In computer science, a software agent or software AI is a computer
program that acts for a user or other program in a relationship of
agency, which derives from the Latin agere (to do): an agreement to act
on one\'s behalf. Such \"action on behalf of\" implies the authority to
decide which, if any, action is appropriate. Agents are colloquially
known as bots, from robot. They may be embodied, as when execution is
paired with a robot body, or as software such as a chatbot executing on
a phone (e.g. Siri) or other computing device. Software agents may be
autonomous or work together with other agents or people. Software agents
interacting with people (e.g. chatbots, human-robot interaction
environments) may possess human-like qualities such as natural language
understanding and speech, personality or embody humanoid form (see
Asimo). Related and derived concepts include intelligent agents (in
particular exhibiting some aspects of artificial intelligence, such as
reasoning), autonomous agents (capable of modifying the methods of
achieving their objectives), distributed agents (being executed on
physically distinct computers), multi-agent systems (distributed agents
that work together to achieve an objective that could not be
accomplished by a single agent acting alone), and mobile agents (agents
that can relocate their execution onto different processors). Concepts
The basic attributes of an autonomous software agent are that agents:
are not strictly invoked for a task, but activate themselves, may reside
in wait status on a host, perceiving context, may get to run status on a
host upon starting conditions, do not require interaction of user, may
invoke other tasks including communication. The term \"agent\" describes
a software abstraction, an idea, or a concept, similar to OOP terms such
as methods, functions, and objects. The concept of an agent provides a
convenient and powerful way to describe a complex software entity that
is capable of acting with a certain degree of autonomy in order to
accomplish tasks on behalf of its host. But unlike objects, which are
defined in terms of methods and attributes, an agent is defined in terms
of its behavior.Various authors have proposed different definitions of
agents, these commonly include concepts such as persistence (code is not
executed on demand but runs continuously and decides for itself when it
should perform some activity) autonomy (agents have capabilities of task
selection, prioritization, goal-directed behavior, decision-making
without human intervention) social ability (agents are able to engage
other components through some sort of communication and coordination,
they may collaborate on a task) reactivity (agents perceive the context
in which they operate and react to it appropriately). Distinguishing
agents from programs All agents are programs, but not all programs are
agents. Contrasting the term with related concepts may help clarify its
meaning. Franklin & Graesser (1997) discuss four key notions that
distinguish agents from arbitrary programs: reaction to the environment,
autonomy, goal-orientation and persistence. Intuitive distinguishing
agents from objects Agents are more autonomous than objects. Agents have
flexible behavior: reactive, proactive, social. Agents have at least one
thread of control but may have more. Distinguishing agents from expert
systems Expert systems are not coupled to their environment. Expert
systems are not designed for reactive, proactive behavior. Expert
systems do not consider social ability. Distinguishing intelligent
software agents from intelligent agents in AI Intelligent agents (also
known as rational agents) are not just computer programs: they may also
be machines, human beings, communities of human beings (such as firms)
or anything that is capable of goal-directed behavior.(Russell & Norvig
2003) Impact of software agents Software agents may offer various
benefits to their end users by automating complex or repetitive tasks.
However, there are organizational and cultural impacts of this
technology that need to be considered prior to implementing software
agents. Organizational impact Work contentment and job satisfaction
impact People like to perform easy tasks providing the sensation of
success unless the repetition of the simple tasking is affecting the
overall output. In general implementing software agents to perform
administrative requirements provides a substantial increase in work
contentment, as administering their own work does never please the
worker. The effort freed up serves for a higher degree of engagement in
the substantial tasks of individual work. Hence, software agents may
provide the basics to implement self-controlled work, relieved from
hierarchical controls and interference. Such conditions may be secured
by application of software agents for required formal support. Cultural
impact The cultural effects of the implementation of software agents
include trust affliction, skills erosion, privacy attrition and social
detachment. Some users may not feel entirely comfortable fully
delegating important tasks to software applications. Those who start
relying solely on intelligent agents may lose important skills, for
example, relating to information literacy. In order to act on a user\'s
behalf, a software agent needs to have a complete understanding of a
user\'s profile, including his/her personal preferences. This, in turn,
may lead to unpredictable privacy issues. When users start relying on
their software agents more, especially for communication activities,
they may lose contact with other human users and look at the world with
the eyes of their agents. These consequences are what agent researchers
and users must consider when dealing with intelligent agent
technologies. History The concept of an agent can be traced back to
Hewitt\'s Actor Model (Hewitt, 1977) - \"A self-contained, interactive
and concurrently-executing object, possessing internal state and
communication capability.\" To be more academic, software agent systems
are a direct evolution of Multi-Agent Systems (MAS). MAS evolved from
Distributed Artificial Intelligence (DAI), Distributed Problem Solving
(DPS) and Parallel AI (PAI), thus inheriting all characteristics (good
and bad) from DAI and AI. John Sculley's 1987 "Knowledge Navigator"
video portrayed an image of a relationship between end-users and agents.
Being an ideal first, this field experienced a series of unsuccessful
top-down implementations, instead of a piece-by-piece, bottom-up
approach. The range of agent types is now (from 1990) broad: WWW, search
engines, etc. Examples of intelligent software agents Buyer agents
(shopping bots) Buyer agents travel around a network (e.g. the internet)
retrieving information about goods and services. These agents, also
known as \'shopping bots\', work very efficiently for commodity products
such as CDs, books, electronic components, and other one-size-fits-all
products. Buyer agents are typically optimized to allow for digital
payment services used in e-commerce and traditional businesses. User
agents (personal agents) User agents, or personal agents, are
intelligent agents that take action on your behalf. In this category
belong those intelligent agents that already perform, or will shortly
perform, the following tasks: Check your e-mail, sort it according to
the user\'s order of preference, and alert you when important emails
arrive. Play computer games as your opponent or patrol game areas for
you. Assemble customized news reports for you. There are several
versions of these, including CNN. Find information for you on the
subject of your choice. Fill out forms on the Web automatically for you,
storing your information for future reference Scan Web pages looking for
and highlighting text that constitutes the \"important\" part of the
information there Discuss topics with you ranging from your deepest
fears to sports Facilitate with online job search duties by scanning
known job boards and sending the resume to opportunities who meet the
desired criteria Profile synchronization across heterogeneous social
networks Monitoring-and-surveillance (predictive) agents Monitoring and
surveillance agents are used to observe and report on equipment, usually
computer systems. The agents may keep track of company inventory levels,
observe competitors\' prices and relay them back to the company, watch
stock manipulation by insider trading and rumors, etc. For example,
NASA\'s Jet Propulsion Laboratory has an agent that monitors inventory,
planning, schedules equipment orders to keep costs down, and manages
food storage facilities. These agents usually monitor complex computer
networks that can keep track of the configuration of each computer
connected to the network. A special case of Monitoring-and-Surveillance
agents are organizations of agents used to emulate the Human
Decision-Making process during tactical operations. The agents monitor
the status of assets (ammunition, weapons available, platforms for
transport, etc.) and receive Goals (Missions) from higher level agents.
The Agents then pursue the Goals with the Assets at hand, minimizing
expenditure of the Assets while maximizing Goal Attainment. (See
Popplewell, \"Agents and Applicability\") Data-mining agents This agent
uses information technology to find trends and patterns in an abundance
of information from many different sources. The user can sort through
this information in order to find whatever information they are seeking.
A data mining agent operates in a data warehouse discovering
information. A \'data warehouse\' brings together information from many
different sources. \"Data mining\" is the process of looking through the
data warehouse to find information that you can use to take action, such
as ways to increase sales or keep customers who are considering
defecting. \'Classification\' is one of the most common types of data
mining, which finds patterns in information and categorizes them into
different classes. Data mining agents can also detect major shifts in
trends or a key indicator and can detect the presence of new information
and alert you to it. For example, the agent may detect a decline in the
construction industry for an economy; based on this relayed information
construction companies will be able to make intelligent decisions
regarding the hiring/firing of employees or the purchase/lease of
equipment in order to best suit their firm. Networking and communicating
agents Some other examples of current intelligent agents include some
spam filters, game bots, and server monitoring tools. Search engine
indexing bots also qualify as intelligent agents. User agent - for
browsing the World Wide Web Mail transfer agent - For serving E-mail,
such as Microsoft Outlook. Why? It communicates with the POP3 mail
server, without users having to understand POP3 command protocols. It
even has rule sets that filter mail for the user, thus sparing them the
trouble of having to do it themselves. SNMP agent In Unix-style
networking servers, httpd is an HTTP daemon that implements the
Hypertext Transfer Protocol at the root of the World Wide Web Management
agents used to manage telecom devices Crowd simulation for safety
planning or 3D computer graphics, Wireless beaconing agent is a simple
process hosted single tasking entity for implementing wireless lock or
electronic leash in conjunction with more complex software agents hosted
e.g. on wireless receivers. Use of autonomous agents (deliberately
equipped with noise) to optimize coordination in groups online. Software
development agents (aka software bots) Software bots are becoming
important in software engineering. Security agents Agents are also used
in software security application to intercept, examine and act on
various types of content. Example include: Data Loss Prevention (DLP)
Agents - examine user operations on a computer or network, compare with
policies specifying allowed actions, and take appropriate action (e.g.
allow, alert, block). The more comprehensive DLP agents can also be used
to perform EDR functions. Endpoint Detection and Response (EDR) Agents -
monitor all activity on an endpoint computer in order to detect and
respond to malicious activities Cloud Access Security Broker (CASB)
Agents - similar to DLP Agents, however examining traffic going to cloud
applications Design issues Issues to consider in the development of
agent-based systems include how tasks are scheduled and how
synchronization of tasks is achieved how tasks are prioritized by agents
how agents can collaborate, or recruit resources, how agents can be
re-instantiated in different environments, and how their internal state
can be stored, how the environment will be probed and how a change of
environment leads to behavioral changes of the agents how messaging and
communication can be achieved, what hierarchies of agents are useful
(e.g. task execution agents, scheduling agents, resource providers
\...).For software agents to work together efficiently they must share
semantics of their data elements. This can be done by having computer
systems publish their metadata. The definition of agent processing can
be approached from two interrelated directions: internal state
processing and ontologies for representing knowledge interaction
protocols -- standards for specifying communication of tasksAgent
systems are used to model real-world systems with concurrency or
parallel processing. Agent Machinery -- Engines of various kinds, which
support the varying degrees of intelligence Agent Content -- Data
employed by the machinery in Reasoning and Learning Agent Access --
Methods to enable the machinery to perceive content and perform actions
as outcomes of Reasoning Agent Security -- Concerns related to
distributed computing, augmented by a few special concerns related to
agentsThe agent uses its access methods to go out into local and remote
databases to forage for content. These access methods may include
setting up news stream delivery to the agent, or retrieval from bulletin
boards, or using a spider to walk the Web. The content that is retrieved
in this way is probably already partially filtered -- by the selection
of the newsfeed or the databases that are searched. The agent next may
use its detailed searching or language-processing machinery to extract
keywords or signatures from the body of the content that has been
received or retrieved. This abstracted content (or event) is then passed
to the agent\'s Reasoning or inferencing machinery in order to decide
what to do with the new content. This process combines the event content
with the rule-based or knowledge content provided by the user. If this
process finds a good hit or match in the new content, the agent may use
another piece of its machinery to do a more detailed search on the
content. Finally, the agent may decide to take an action based on the
new content; for example, to notify the user that an important event has
occurred. This action is verified by a security function and then given
the authority of the user. The agent makes use of a user-access method
to deliver that message to the user. If the user confirms that the event
is important by acting quickly on the notification, the agent may also
employ its learning machinery to increase its weighting for this kind of
event. Bots can act on behalf of their creators to do good as well as
bad. There are a few ways which bots can be created to demonstrate that
they are designed with the best intention and are not built to do harm.
This is first done by having a bot identify itself in the user-agent
HTTP header when communicating with a site. The source IP address must
also be validated to establish itself as legitimate. Next, the bot must
also always respect a site\'s robots.txt file since it has become the
standard across most of the web. And like respecting the robots.txt
file, bots should shy away from being too aggressive and respect any
crawl delay instructions. Notions and frameworks for agents DAML (DARPA
Agent Markup Language) 3APL (Artificial Autonomous Agents Programming
Language) GOAL agent programming language Open Agent Architecture (OAA)
Web Ontology Language (OWL) daemons in Unix-like systems. Java Agent
Template (JAT) Java Agent Development Framework (JADE) SARL agent
programming language (arguably an Actor and not Agent oriented paradigm)
See also Agent architecture Chatbot Data loss prevention Endpoint
detection and response Software bot References External links Software
Agents: An Overview, Hyacinth S. Nwana. Knowledge Engineering Review,
11(3):1--40, September 1996. Cambridge University Press. FIPA The
Foundation for Intelligent Physical Agents JADE Java Agent Developing
Framework, an Open Source framework developed by Telecom Italia Labs
European Software-Agent Research Center Archived 2017-09-14 at the
Wayback Machine SemanticAgent An Open Source framework to develop SWRL
based Agents on top of JADE Mobile-C A Multi-Agent Platform for Mobile
C/C++ Agents. HLL High-Level Logic (HLL) Open Source Project. Open
source project KATO for PHP and Java developers to write software agents
