Springer Nature or the Springer Nature Group is a German-British
academic publishing company created by the May 2015 merger of Springer
Science+Business Media and Holtzbrinck Publishing Group\'s Nature
Publishing Group, Palgrave Macmillan, and Macmillan Education. History
The company originates from a number of journals and publishing houses,
notably Springer-Verlag, which was founded in 1842 by Julius Springer in
Berlin (the grandfather of Bernhard Springer who founded Springer
Publishing in 1950 in New York), Nature Publishing Group which has
published Nature since 1869, and Macmillan Education, which goes back to
Macmillan Publishers founded in 1843.Springer Nature was formed in 2015
by the merger of Nature Publishing Group, Palgrave Macmillan and
Macmillan Education (held by Holtzbrinck Publishing Group) with Springer
Science+Business Media (held by BC Partners). Plans for the merger were
first announced on 15 January 2015. The transaction was concluded in May
2015 with Holtzbrinck having the majority 53% share.IPO attempts in May
2018 and Autumn 2020 were unfruitful due to unfavorable market
conditions.In 2021, Springer Nature acquired Atlantis Press, an open
access publisher founded 2006 in Paris, focusing on scientific,
technical, and medical (STM) content, and publication of conference
proceedings. Current company After the merger, former Springer
Science+Business Media CEO Derk Haank became CEO of Springer Nature.
When he retired by the end of 2017, he was succeeded by Daniel Ropers,
the co-founder and long-time CEO of bol.com. In September 2019, Ropers
was replaced by Frank Vrancken Peeters.The company is releasing a number
of Policies & Reports, including a Modern Slavery Act statement, a Tax
strategy, a gender pay gap report for Springer Nature's UK operations,
Editorial and publishing policies, Code of conduct, etc. Brands The
following major brands belong to the group (see also Subsidiaries):
Nature Springer.com BioMed Central Scientific American Heinrich Vogel
Verlag SciGraph Controversies In 2017, the company agreed to block
access to hundreds of articles on its Chinese site, cutting off access
to articles on Tibet, Taiwan, and China\'s political elite.The company
retracted a paper in 2019, in its journal BMC Emergency Medicine due to
dubious peer-review process (a herpetologist could have denied the
publication of the paper).In August 2020, Springer Nature was reported
to have rejected the publication of an article at the behest of its
co-publisher, Wenzhou Medical University, from a Taiwanese doctor
because the word \"China\" was not placed after \"Taiwan.\"In July 2020,
Springer Nature retracted a paper in the journal Society due to dubious
review process and criticism regarding racism.In November 2021, Springer
Nature retracted 44 nonsense papers from the Arabian Journal of
Geosciences after a lapse in the peer review process. Subsidiaries
Further reading Fact Sheet 2022 (linked PDF) Fact Sheet Open Access 2022
(linked PDF) Springer Nature Group Press Office See also Publishing
Scientific publication References External links Official website
