IBM SPSS Modeler is a data mining and text analytics software
application from IBM. It is used to build predictive models and conduct
other analytic tasks. It has a visual interface which allows users to
leverage statistical and data mining algorithms without programming. One
of its main aims from the outset was to get rid of unnecessary
complexity in data transformations, and to make complex predictive
models very easy to use. The first version incorporated decision trees
(ID3), and neural networks (backprop), which could both be trained
without underlying knowledge of how those techniques worked. IBM SPSS
Modeler was originally named Clementine by its creators, Integral
Solutions Limited. This name continued for a while after SPSS\'s
acquisition of the product. SPSS later changed the name to SPSS
Clementine, and then later to PASW Modeler. Following IBM\'s 2009
acquisition of SPSS, the product was renamed IBM SPSS Modeler, its
current name. Applications SPSS Modeler has been used in these and other
industries: Customer analytics and Customer relationship management
(CRM) Fraud detection and prevention Optimizing insurance claims Risk
management Manufacturing quality improvement Healthcare quality
improvement Forecasting demand or sales Law enforcement and border
security Education Telecommunications Entertainment: e.g., predicting
movie box office receipts Editions IBM sells the current version of SPSS
Modeler (version 18.2.1) in two separate bundles of features. These two
bundles are called \"editions\" by IBM: SPSS Modeler Professional: used
for structured data, such as databases, mainframe data systems, flat
files or BI systems SPSS Modeler Premium: Includes all the features of
Modeler Professional, with the addition of:-- Text analyticsBoth
editions are available in desktop and server configurations. In addition
to the traditional IBM SPSS Modeler desktop installations, IBM now
offers the SPSS Modeler interface as an option in the Watson Studio
product line which includes Watson Studio (cloud), Watson Studio Local,
and Watson Studio Desktop. Watson Studio Desktop documentation:
https://www.ibm.com/support/knowledgecenter/SSBFT6_1.1.0/mstmap/kc_welcome.html
Release history Clementine 1.0 -- June 1994 by ISL Clementine 5.1 -- Jan
2000 Clementine 12.0 -- Jan 2008 PASW Modeler 13 (formerly Clementine)
-- April 2009 IBM SPSS Modeler 14.0 -- 2010 IBM SPSS Modeler 14.2 --
2011 IBM SPSS Modeler 15.0 -- June 2012 IBM SPSS Modeler 16.0 --
December 2013 IBM SPSS Modeler 17.0 -- March 2015 IBM SPSS Modeler 18.0
\-- March 2016 IBM SPSS Modeler 18.1 \-- June 2017 IBM SPSS Modeler 18.2
\-- March 2019 Product history Early versions of the software were
called Clementine and were Unix-based. The first version was released on
Jun 9th 1994, after Beta testing at 6 customer sites. Clementine was
originally developed by a UK company named Integral Solutions Limited
(ISL), in Collaboration with Artificial Intelligence researchers at
Sussex University. The original Clementine was implemented in Poplog,
which ISL marketed for Sussex University. Clementine mainly used the
Poplog languages, Pop11, with some parts written in C for speed (such as
the neural network engine), along with additional tools provided as part
of Solaris, VMS and various versions of Unix. The tool quickly garnered
the attention of the data mining community (at that time in its
infancy). In order to reach a larger market, ISL then Ported Poplog to
Microsoft Windows using the NutCracker package, later named MKS Toolkit
to provide the Unix graphical facilities. Original in many respects,
Clementine was the first data mining tool to use an icon based Graphical
user interface rather than requiring users to write in a Programming
language, though that option remained available for expert users. In
1998 ISL was acquired by SPSS Inc., who saw the potential for extended
development as a commercial data mining tool. In early 2000 the software
was developed into a client / server architecture, and shortly afterward
the client front-end interface component was completely re-written and
replaced with a new Java front-end, which allowed deeper integration
with the other tools provided by SPSS. SPSS Clementine version 7.0: The
client front-end runs under Windows. The server back-end Unix variants
(Sun, HP-UX, AIX), Linux, and Windows. The graphical user interface is
written in Java. IBM SPSS Modeler 14.0 was the first release of Modeler
by IBM. IBM SPSS Modeler 15, released in June 2012, introduced
significant new functionality for Social Network Analysis and Entity
Analytics. See also IBM SPSS Statistics List of statistical packages
Cross Industry Standard Process for Data Mining References Further
reading Chapman, P.; Clinton, J.; Kerber, R.; Khabaza, T.; Reinartz, T.;
Shearer, C.; Wirth, R. (2000). \"CRISP-DM 1.0\" (PDF). Chicago, IL:
SPSS. {{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires \|journal= (help) Nisbet,
R.; Elder, J.; Miner, G. (2009). \"Handbook of Statistical Analysis and
Data Mining Applications\". Burlington, MA: Academic Press (Elsevier).
{{cite journal}}: Cite journal requires \|journal= (help) Khabaza, Tom
(1999). \"The Story of Clementine\" (PDF). {{cite journal}}: Cite
journal requires \|journal= (help) External links \[1\] SPSS Modeler
18.2.1 Documentation Users Guide -- SPSS Modeler 18.2.1 SPSS pros and
cons -- SPSS Modeler 18.2.1 IBM SPSS Modeler website IBM SPSS Modeler
online from cloud
