Statistical learning is the ability for humans and other animals to
extract statistical regularities from the world around them to learn
about the environment. Although statistical learning is now thought to
be a generalized learning mechanism, the phenomenon was first identified
in human infant language acquisition. The earliest evidence for these
statistical learning abilities comes from a study by Jenny Saffran,
Richard Aslin, and Elissa Newport, in which 8-month-old infants were
presented with nonsense streams of monotone speech. Each stream was
composed of four three-syllable \"pseudowords\" that were repeated
randomly. After exposure to the speech streams for two minutes, infants
reacted differently to hearing \"pseudowords\" as opposed to
\"nonwords\" from the speech stream, where nonwords were composed of the
same syllables that the infants had been exposed to, but in a different
order. This suggests that infants are able to learn statistical
relationships between syllables even with very limited exposure to a
language. That is, infants learn which syllables are always paired
together and which ones only occur together relatively rarely,
suggesting that they are parts of two different units. This method of
learning is thought to be one way that children learn which groups of
syllables form individual words.Since the initial discovery of the role
of statistical learning in lexical acquisition, the same mechanism has
been proposed for elements of phonological acquisition, and syntactical
acquisition, as well as in non-linguistic domains. Further research has
also indicated that statistical learning is likely a domain-general and
even species-general learning mechanism, occurring for visual as well as
auditory information, and in both primates and non-primates. Lexical
acquisition The role of statistical learning in language acquisition has
been particularly well documented in the area of lexical acquisition.
One important contribution to infants\' understanding of segmenting
words from a continuous stream of speech is their ability to recognize
statistical regularities of the speech heard in their environments.
Although many factors play an important role, this specific mechanism is
powerful and can operate over a short time scale. Original findings It
is a well-established finding that, unlike written language, spoken
language does not have any clear boundaries between words; spoken
language is a continuous stream of sound rather than individual words
with silences between them. This lack of segmentation between linguistic
units presents a problem for young children learning language, who must
be able to pick out individual units from the continuous speech streams
that they hear. One proposed method of how children are able to solve
this problem is that they are attentive to the statistical regularities
of the world around them. For example, in the phrase \"pretty baby,\"
children are more likely to hear the sounds pre and ty heard together
during the entirety of the lexical input around them than they are to
hear the sounds ty and ba together. In an artificial grammar learning
study with adult participants, Saffran, Newport, and Aslin found that
participants were able to locate word boundaries based only on
transitional probabilities, suggesting that adults are capable of using
statistical regularities in a language-learning task. This is a robust
finding that has been widely replicated.To determine if young children
have these same abilities Saffran Aslin and Newport exposed 8-month-old
infants to an artificial grammar. The grammar was composed of four
words, each composed of three nonsense syllables. During the experiment,
infants heard a continuous speech stream of these words . Importantly,
the speech was presented in a monotone with no cues (such as pauses,
intonation, etc.) to word boundaries other than the statistical
probabilities. Within a word, the transitional probability of two
syllable pairs was 1.0: in the word bidaku, for example, the probability
of hearing the syllable da immediately after the syllable bi was 100%.
Between words, however, the transitional probability of hearing a
syllable pair was much lower: After any given word (e.g., bidaku) was
presented, one of three words could follow (in this case, padoti,
golabu, or tupiro), so the likelihood of hearing any given syllable
after ku was only 33%. To determine if infants were picking up on the
statistical information, each infant was presented with multiple
presentations of either a word from the artificial grammar or a nonword
made up of the same syllables but presented in a random order. Infants
who were presented with nonwords during the test phase listened
significantly longer to these words than infants who were presented with
words from the artificial grammar, showing a novelty preference for
these new nonwords. However, the implementation of the test could also
be due to infants learning serial-order information and not to actually
learning transitional probabilities between words. That is, at test,
infants heard strings such as dapiku and tilado that were never
presented during learning; they could simply have learned that the
syllable ku never followed the syllable pi.To look more closely at this
issue, Saffran Aslin and Newport conducted another study in which
infants underwent the same training with the artificial grammar but then
were presented with either words or part-words rather than words or
nonwords. The part-words were syllable sequences composed of the last
syllable from one word and the first two syllables from another (such as
kupado). Because the part-words had been heard during the time when
children were listening to the artificial grammar, preferential
listening to these part-words would indicate that children were learning
not only serial-order information, but also the statistical likelihood
of hearing particular syllable sequences. Again, infants showed greater
listening times to the novel (part-) words, indicating that 8-month-old
infants were able to extract these statistical regularities from a
continuous speech stream. Further research This result has been the
impetus for much more research on the role of statistical learning in
lexical acquisition and other areas (see). In a follow-up to the
original report, Aslin, Saffran, and Newport found that even when words
and part words occurred equally often in the speech stream, but with
different transitional probabilities between syllables of words and part
words, infants were still able to detect the statistical regularities
and still preferred to listen to the novel part-words over the
familiarized words. This finding provides stronger evidence that infants
are able to pick up transitional probabilities from the speech they
hear, rather than just being aware of frequencies of individual syllable
sequences.Another follow-up study examined the extent to which the
statistical information learned during this type of artificial grammar
learning feeds into knowledge that infants may already have about their
native language. Infants preferred to listen to words over part-words,
whereas there was no significant difference in the nonsense frame
condition. This finding suggests that even pre-linguistic infants are
able to integrate the statistical cues they learn in a laboratory into
their previously acquired knowledge of a language. In other words, once
infants have acquired some linguistic knowledge, they incorporate newly
acquired information into that previously acquired learning. A related
finding indicates that slightly older infants can acquire both lexical
and grammatical regularities from a single set of input, suggesting that
they are able to use outputs of one type of statistical learning (cues
that lead to the discovery of word boundaries) as input to a second type
(cues that lead to the discovery of syntactical regularities. At test,
12-month-olds preferred to listen to sentences that had the same
grammatical structure as the artificial language they had been tested on
rather than sentences that had a different (ungrammatical) structure.
Because learning grammatical regularities requires infants to be able to
determine boundaries between individual words, this indicates that
infants who are still quite young are able to acquire multiple levels of
language knowledge (both lexical and syntactical) simultaneously,
indicating that statistical learning is a powerful mechanism at play in
language learning.Despite the large role that statistical learning
appears to play in lexical acquisition, it is likely not the only
mechanism by which infants learn to segment words. Statistical learning
studies are generally conducted with artificial grammars that have no
cues to word boundary information other than transitional probabilities
between words. Real speech, though, has many different types of cues to
word boundaries, including prosodic and phonotactic
information.Together, the findings from these studies of statistical
learning in language acquisition indicate that statistical properties of
the language are a strong cue in helping infants learn their first
language. Phonological acquisition There is much evidence that
statistical learning is an important component of both discovering which
phonemes are important for a given language and which contrasts within
phonemes are important. Having this knowledge is important for aspects
of both speech perception and speech production. Distributional learning
Since the discovery of infants\' statistical learning abilities in word
learning, the same general mechanism has also been studied in other
facets of language learning. For example, it is well-established that
infants can discriminate between phonemes of many different languages
but eventually become unable to discriminate between phonemes that do
not appear in their native language; however, it was not clear how this
decrease in discriminatory ability came about. Maye et al. suggested
that the mechanism responsible might be a statistical learning mechanism
in which infants track the distributional regularities of the sounds in
their native language. To test this idea, Maye et al. exposed 6- and
8-month-old infants to a continuum of speech sounds that varied on the
degree to which they were voiced. The distribution that the infants
heard was either bimodal, with sounds from both ends of the voicing
continuum heard most often, or unimodal, with sounds from the middle of
the distribution heard most often. The results indicated that infants
from both age groups were sensitive to the distribution of phonemes. At
test, infants heard either non-alternating (repeated exemplars of tokens
3 or 6 from an 8-token continuum) or alternating (exemplars of tokens 1
and 8) exposures to specific phonemes on the continuum. Infants exposed
to the bimodal distribution listened longer to the alternating trials
than the non-alternating trials while there was no difference in
listening times for infants exposed to the unimodal distribution. This
finding indicates that infants exposed the bimodal distribution were
better able to discriminate sounds from the two ends of the distribution
than were infants in the unimodal condition, regardless of age. This
type of statistical learning differs from that used in lexical
acquisition, as it requires infants to track frequencies rather than
transitional probabilities, and has been named \"distributional
learning\".Distributional learning has also been found to help infants
contrast two phonemes that they initially have difficulty in
discriminating between. Maye, Weiss, and Aslin found that infants who
were exposed to a bimodal distribution of a non-native contrast that was
initially difficult to discriminate were better able to discriminate the
contrast than infants exposed to a unimodal distribution of the same
contrast. Maye et al. also found that infants were able to abstract
features of a contrast (i.e., voicing onset time) and generalize that
feature to the same type of contrast at a different place of
articulation, a finding that has not been found in adults. In a review
of the role of distributional learning on phonological acquisition,
Werker et al. note that distributional learning cannot be the only
mechanism by which phonetic categories are acquired. However, it does
seem clear that this type of statistical learning mechanism can play a
role in this skill, although research is ongoing. Perceptual magnet
effect A related finding regarding statistical cues to phonological
acquisition is a phenomenon known as the perceptual magnet effect. In
this effect, a prototypical phoneme of a person\'s native language acts
as a \"magnet\" for similar phonemes, which are perceived as belonging
to the same category as the prototypical phoneme. In the original test
of this effect, adult participants were asked to indicate if a given
exemplar of a particular phoneme differed from a referent phoneme. If
the referent phoneme is a non-prototypical phoneme for that language,
both adults and 6-month-old infants show less generalization to other
sounds than they do for prototypical phonemes, even if the subjective
distance between the sounds is the same. That is, adults and infants are
both more likely to notice that a particular phoneme differs from the
referent phoneme if that referent phoneme is a non-prototypical exemplar
than if it is a prototypical exemplar. The prototypes themselves are
apparently discovered through a distributional learning process, in
which infants are sensitive to the frequencies with which certain sounds
occur and treat those that occur most often as the prototypical phonemes
of their language. Syntactical acquisition A statistical learning device
has also been proposed as a component of syntactical acquisition for
young children. Early evidence for this mechanism came largely from
studies of computer modeling or analyses of natural language corpora.
These early studies focused largely on distributional information
specifically rather than statistical learning mechanisms generally.
Specifically, in these early papers it was proposed that children
created templates of possible sentence structures involving unnamed
categories of word types (i.e., nouns or verbs, although children would
not put these labels on their categories). Children were thought to
learn which words belonged to the same categories by tracking the
similar contexts in which words of the same category appeared. Later
studies expanded these results by looking at the actual behavior of
children or adults who had been exposed to artificial grammars. These
later studies also considered the role of statistical learning more
broadly than the earlier studies, placing their results in the context
of the statistical learning mechanisms thought to be involved with other
aspects of language learning, such as lexical acquisition. Experimental
results Evidence from a series of four experiments conducted by Gomez
and Gerken suggests that children are able to generalize grammatical
structures with less than two minutes of exposure to an artificial
grammar. In the first experiment, 11-12 month-old infants were trained
on an artificial grammar composed of nonsense words with a set
grammatical structure. At test, infants heard both novel grammatical and
ungrammatical sentences. Infants oriented longer toward the grammatical
sentences, in line with previous research that suggests that infants
generally orient for a longer amount of time to natural instances of
language rather than altered instances of language e.g.,. (This
familiarity preference differs from the novelty preference generally
found in word-learning studies, due to the differences between lexical
acquisition and syntactical acquisition.) This finding indicates that
young children are sensitive to the grammatical structure of language
even after minimal exposure. Gomez and Gerken also found that this
sensitivity is evident when ungrammatical transitions are located in the
middle of the sentence (unlike in the first experiment, in which all the
errors occurred at the beginning and end of the sentences), that the
results could not be due to an innate preference for the grammatical
sentences caused by something other than grammar, and that children are
able to generalize the grammatical rules to new vocabulary. Together
these studies suggest that infants are able to extract a substantial
amount of syntactic knowledge even from limited exposure to a language.
Children apparently detected grammatical anomalies whether the
grammatical violation in the test sentences occurred at the end or in
the middle of the sentence. Additionally, even when the individual words
of the grammar were changed, infants were still able to discriminate
between grammatical and ungrammatical strings during the test phase.
This generalization indicates that infants were not learning
vocabulary-specific grammatical structures, but abstracting the general
rules of that grammar and applying those rules to novel vocabulary.
Furthermore, in all four experiments, the test of grammatical structures
occurred five minutes after the initial exposure to the artificial
grammar had ended, suggesting that the infants were able to maintain the
grammatical abstractions they had learned even after a short delay. In a
similar study, Saffran found that adults and older children (first- and
second grade children) were also sensitive to syntactical information
after exposure to an artificial language which had no cues to phrase
structure other than the statistical regularities that were present.
Both adults and children were able to pick out sentences that were
ungrammatical at a rate greater than chance, even under an
\"incidental\" exposure condition in which participants\' primary goal
was to complete a different task while hearing the language. Although
the number of studies dealing with statistical learning of syntactical
information is limited, the available evidence does indicate that the
statistical learning mechanisms are likely a contributing factor to
children\'s ability to learn their language. Statistical learning in
bilingualism Much of the early work using statistical learning paradigms
focused on the ability for children or adults to learn a single
language, consistent with the process of language acquisition for
monolingual speakers or learners. However, it is estimated that
approximately 60-75% of people in the world are bilingual. More
recently, researchers have begun looking at the role of statistical
learning for those who speak more than one language. Although there are
no reviews on this topic yet, Weiss, Gerfen, and Mitchel examined how
hearing input from multiple artificial languages simultaneously can
affect the ability to learn either or both languages. Over four
experiments, Weiss et al. found that, after exposure to two artificial
languages, adult learners are capable of determining word boundaries in
both languages when each language is spoken by a different speaker.
However, when the two languages were spoken by the same speaker,
participants were able learn both languages only when they were
\"congruent\"---when the word boundaries of one language matched the
word boundaries of the other. When the languages were incongruent---a
syllable that appeared in the middle of a word in one language appeared
at the end of the word in the other language---and spoken by a single
speaker, participants were able to learn, at best, one of the two
languages. A final experiment showed that the inability to learn
incongruent languages spoken in the same voice was not due to syllable
overlap between the languages but due to differing word boundaries.
Similar work replicates the finding that learners are able to learn two
sets of statistical representations when an additional cue is present
(two different male voices in this case). In their paradigm, the two
languages were presented consecutively, rather than interleaved as in
Weiss et al.\'s paradigm, and participants did learn the first
artificial language to which they had been exposed better than the
second, although participants\' performance was above chance for both
languages. While statistical learning improves and strengthens
multilingualism, it appears that the inverse is not true. In a study by
Yim and Rudoy it was found that both monolingual and bilingual children
perform statistical learning tasks equally well. Antovich and Graf Estes
found that 14-month-old bilingual children are better than monolinguals
at segmenting two different artificial languages using transitional
probability cues. They suggest that a bilingual environment in early
childhood trains children to rely on statistical regularities to segment
the speech flow and access two lexical systems. Limitations on
statistical learning Word-referent mapping A statistical learning
mechanism has also been proposed for learning the meaning of words.
Specifically, Yu and Smith conducted a pair of studies in which adults
were exposed to pictures of objects and heard nonsense words. Each
nonsense word was paired with a particular object. There were 18 total
word-referent pairs, and each participant was presented with either 2,
3, or 4 objects at a time, depending on the condition, and heard the
nonsense word associated with one of those objects. Each word-referent
pair was presented 6 times over the course of the training trials; after
the completion of the training trials, participants completed a
forced-alternative test in which they were asked to choose the correct
referent that matched a nonsense word they were given. Participants were
able to choose the correct item more often than would happen by chance,
indicating, according to the authors, that they were using statistical
learning mechanisms to track co-occurrence probabilities across training
trials. An alternative hypothesis is that learners in this type of task
may be using a \"propose-but-verify\" mechanism rather than a
statistical learning mechanism. Medina et al. and Trueswell et al. argue
that, because Yu and Smith only tracked knowledge at the end of the
training, rather than tracking knowledge on a trial-by-trial basis, it
is impossible to know if participants were truly updating statistical
probabilities of co-occurrence (and therefore maintaining multiple
hypotheses simultaneously), or if, instead, they were forming a single
hypothesis and checking it on the next trial. For example, if a
participant is presented with a picture of a dog and a picture of a
shoe, and hears the nonsense word vash she might hypothesize that vash
refers to the dog. On a future trial, she may see a picture of a shoe
and a picture of a door and again hear the word vash. If statistical
learning is the mechanism by which word-referent mappings are learned,
then the participant would be more likely to select the picture of the
shoe than the door, as shoe would have appeared in conjunction with the
word vash 100% of the time. However, if participants are simply forming
a single hypothesis, they may fail to remember the context of the
previous presentation of vash (especially if, as in the experimental
conditions, there are multiple trials with other words in between the
two presentations of vash) and therefore be at chance in this second
trial. According to this proposed mechanism of word learning, if the
participant had correctly guessed that vash referred to the shoe in the
first trial, her hypothesis would be confirmed in the subsequent trial.
To distinguish between these two possibilities, Trueswell et al.
conducted a series of experiments similar to those conducted by Yu and
Smith except that participants were asked to indicate their choice of
the word-referent mapping on each trial, and only a single object name
was presented on each trial (with varying numbers of objects).
Participants would therefore have been at chance when they are forced to
make a choice in their first trial. The results from the subsequent
trials indicate that participants were not using a statistical learning
mechanism in these experiments, but instead were using a
propose-and-verify mechanism, holding only one potential hypothesis in
mind at a time. Specifically, if participants had chosen an incorrect
word-referent mapping in an initial presentation of a nonsense word
(from a display of five possible choices), their likelihood of choosing
the correct word-referent mapping in the next trial of that word was
still at chance, or 20%. If, though, the participant had chosen the
correct word-referent mapping on an initial presentation of a nonsense
word, the likelihood of choosing the correct word-referent mapping on
the subsequent presentation of that word was approximately 50%. These
results were also replicated in a condition where participants were
choosing between only two alternatives. These results suggest that
participants did not remember the surrounding context of individual
presentations and were therefore not using statistical cues to determine
the word-referent mappings. Instead, participants make a hypothesis
regarding a word-referent mapping and, on the next presentation of that
word, either confirm or reject the hypothesis accordingly. Overall,
these results, along with similar results from Medina et al., indicate
that word meanings may not be learned through a statistical learning
mechanism in these experiments, which ask participants to hypothesize a
mapping even on the first occurrence (i.e., not cross-situationally).
However, when the propose-but-verify mechanism has been compared to a
statistical learning mechanism, the former was unable to reproduce
individual learning trajectories nor fit as well as the latter. Need for
social interaction Additionally, statistical learning by itself cannot
account even for those aspects of language acquisition for which it has
been shown to play a large role. For example, Kuhl, Tsao, and Liu found
that young English-learning infants who spent time in a laboratory
session with a native Mandarin speaker were able to distinguish between
phonemes that occur in Mandarin but not in English, unlike infants who
were in a control condition. Infants in this control condition came to
the lab as often as infants in the experimental condition, but were
exposed only to English; when tested at a later date, they were unable
to distinguish the Mandarin phonemes. In a second experiment, the
authors presented infants with audio or audiovisual recordings of
Mandarin speakers and tested the infants\' ability to distinguish
between the Mandarin phonemes. In this condition, infants failed to
distinguish the foreign language phonemes. This finding indicates that
social interaction is a necessary component of language learning and
that, even if infants are presented with the raw data of hearing a
language, they are unable to take advantage of the statistical cues
present in that data if they are not also experiencing the social
interaction. Domain generality Although the phenomenon of statistical
learning was first discovered in the context of language acquisition and
there is much evidence of its role in that purpose, work since the
original discovery has suggested that statistical learning may be a
domain general skill and is likely not unique to humans. For example,
Saffran, Johnson, Aslin, and Newport found that both adults and infants
were able to learn statistical probabilities of \"words\" created by
playing different musical tones (i.e., participants heard the musical
notes D, E, and F presented together during training and were able to
recognize those notes as a unit at test as compared to three notes that
had not been presented together). In non-auditory domains, there is
evidence that humans are able to learn statistical visual information
whether that information is presented across space, e.g., or time,
e.g.,. Evidence of statistical learning has also been found in other
primates, e.g., and some limited statistical learning abilities have
been found even in non-primates like rats. Together these findings
suggest that statistical learning may be a generalized learning
mechanism that happens to be utilized in language acquisition, rather
than a mechanism that is unique to the human infant\'s ability to learn
his or her language(s). Further evidence for domain general statistical
learning was suggested in a study run through the University of Cornell
Department of Psychology concerning visual statistical learning in
infancy. Researchers in this study questioned whether domain generality
of statistical learning in infancy would be seen using visual
information. After first viewing images in statistically predictable
patterns, infants were then exposed to the same familiar patterns in
addition to novel sequences of the same identical stimulus components.
Interest in the visuals was measured by the amount of time the child
looked at the stimuli in which the researchers named \"looking time\".
All ages of infant participants showed more interest in the novel
sequence relative to the familiar sequence. In demonstrating a
preference for the novel sequences (which violated the transitional
probability that defined the grouping of the original stimuli) the
results of the study support the likelihood of domain general
statistical learning in infancy. == References ==
