Statistica is an advanced analytics software package originally
developed by StatSoft and currently maintained by TIBCO Software Inc.
Statistica provides data analysis, data management, statistics, data
mining, machine learning, text analytics and data visualization
procedures. Overview Statistica is a suite of analytics software
products and solutions originally developed by StatSoft and acquired by
Dell in March 2014. The software includes an array of data analysis,
data management, data visualization, and data mining procedures; as well
as a variety of predictive modeling, clustering, classification, and
exploratory techniques. Additional techniques are available through
integration with the free, open source R programming environment.
Different packages of analytical techniques are available in six product
lines. History Statistica originally derives from a set of software
packages and add-ons that were initially developed during the mid-1980s
by StatSoft. Following the 1986 release of Complete Statistical System
(CSS) and the 1988 release of Macintosh Statistical System (MacSS), the
first DOS version (trademarked in capitals as STATISTICA) was released
in 1991. In 1992, the Macintosh version of Statistica was released.
Statistica 5.0 was released in 1995. It ran on both the new 32-bit
Windows 95/NT and the older version of Windows (3.1). It featured many
new statistics and graphics procedures, a word-processor-style output
editor (combining tables and graphs), and a built-in development
environment that enabled the user to easily design new procedures (e.g.,
via the included Statistica Basic language) and integrate them with the
Statistica system. Statistica 5.1 was released in 1996 followed by
Statistica CA \'97 and Statistica \'98 editions. In 2001, Statistica 6
was based on the COM architecture and it included multithreading and
support for distributed computing. Statistica 9 was released in 2009,
supporting 32 bit and 64-bit computing. Statistica 10 was released in
November 2010. This release featured further performance optimizations
for the 64-bit CPU architecture, as well as multithreading technologies,
integration with Microsoft SharePoint, Microsoft Office 2010 and other
applications, the ability to generate Java and C# code, and other GUI
and kernel improvements.Statistica 12 was released in April 2013 and
features a new GUI, performance improvements when handling large amounts
of data, a new visual analytic workspace, a new database query tool as
well as several analytics enhancements.Localized versions of Statistica
(including the entire family of products) are available in Chinese (both
Traditional and Simplified), Czech, English, French, German, Italian,
Japanese, Polish, Russian, and Spanish. Documentation is available in
Arabic, Chinese, Czech, English, French, German, Hungarian, Italian,
Japanese, Korean, Polish, Portuguese, Russian, Spanish, and other
languages. Acquisition history Statistica was acquired by Dell in March
2014. In November 2016, Dell sold off several pieces of its software
group, and Francisco Partners and Elliott Management Corporation
acquired Statistica as part of its purchase of Quest Software from Dell.
On May 15, 2017, TIBCO Software Inc. announced it entered into an
agreement to acquire Statistica. Release history List of releases:
PsychoStat - 1984 Statistical Supplement for Lotus 1-2-3 - 1985
StatFast/Mac - 1985 CSS 1 - 1987 CSS 2 - 1988 MacSS - 1988
STATISTICA/DOS - 1991 STATISTICA/Mac - 1992 STATISTICA 4.0 - 1993
STATISTICA 4.5 - 1994 STATISTICA 5.0 - 1995 STATISTICA 5.1 - 1996
STATISTICA 5.5 - 1999 STATISTICA 6.0 - 2001 STATISTICA 7.0 - 2004
STATISTICA 7.1 - 2005 STATISTICA 8.0 - 2007 STATISTICA 9.0 - 2009
STATISTICA 9.1 - 2009 STATISTICA 10.0 - 2010 STATISTICA 11.0 - 2012
STATISTICA 12.0 - 2013 Statistica 12.5 - April 2014 Statistica 12.6 -
December 2014 Statistica 12.7 - May 2015 Statistica 13.0 - Sept 2015
Statistica 13.1 - June 2016 Statistica 13.2 - Sep 30, 2016 Statistica
13.3 - June, 2017 Statistica 13.3.1 - November, 2017 Statistica 13.4 -
May 2018 Statistica 13.5 - November 2018 Statistica 13.6 - November 2019
Statistica 14.0 - December 2020 Statistica 14.0.1 - July 2022 Graphics
Statistica includes analytic and exploratory graphs in addition to
standard 2- and 3-dimensional graphs. Brushing actions (interactive
labeling, marking, and data exclusion) allow for investigation of
outliers and exploratory data analysis. User interface Operation of the
software typically involves loading a table of data and applying
statistical functions from pull-down menus or (in versions starting from
9.0) from the ribbon bar. The menus then prompt for the variables to be
included and the type of analysis required. It is not necessary to type
command prompts. Each analysis may include graphical or tabular output
and is stored in a separate workbook. See also Comparison of statistical
packages StatSoft References Further reading Afifi, A.; Clark, V.; May,
S. (2003). Computer-Aided Multivariate Analysis. New York: CRC Press.
Hill, T., and Lewicki, P. (2007). STATISTICS Methods and Applications.
Tulsa, OK: StatSoft. Nisbet, R., Elder, J., and Miner, G. (2009).
Handbook of Statistical Analysis and Data Mining Applications.
Burlington, MA: Academic Press (Elsevier). SÃ¡, Joaquim (2007). Applied
Statistics Using Spss, STATISTICA, Matlab and R. Berlin: Springer. ISBN
978-3-540-71971-7. Stein, Philip G.; Matey, James R.; Pitts, Karen
(1997). \"A Review of Statistical Software for the Apple Macintosh\".
The American Statistician. 51 (1): 67--82.
doi:10.1080/00031305.1997.10473593. External links TIBCO Data Science
(formerly known as Statistica) StatSoft Homepage Electronics statistics
textbook online \[1\]
