Structural health monitoring (SHM) involves the observation and analysis
of a system over time using periodically sampled response measurements
to monitor changes to the material and geometric properties of
engineering structures such as bridges and buildings. For long term SHM,
the output of this process is periodically updated information regarding
the ability of the structure to perform its intended function in light
of the inevitable aging and degradation resulting from operational
environments. After extreme events, such as earthquakes or blast
loading, SHM is used for rapid condition screening and aims to provide,
in near real time, reliable information regarding the integrity of the
structure.The SHM process involves selecting the excitation methods, the
sensor types, number and locations, and the data
acquisition/storage/transmittal hardware commonly called health and
usage monitoring systems. Measurements may be taken to either directly
detect any degradation or damage that may occur to a system or
indirectly by measuring the size and frequency of loads experienced to
allow the state of the system to be predicted. To directly monitor the
state of a system it is necessary to identify features in the acquired
data that allows one to distinguish between the undamaged and damaged
structure. One of the most common feature extraction methods is based on
correlating measured system response quantities, such a vibration
amplitude or frequency, with observations of the degraded system. Damage
accumulation testing, during which significant structural components of
the system under study are degraded by subjecting them to realistic
loading conditions, can also be used to identify appropriate features.
This process may involve induced-damage testing, fatigue testing,
corrosion growth, or temperature cycling to accumulate certain types of
damage in an accelerated fashion. Introduction Qualitative and
non-continuous methods have long been used to evaluate structures for
their capacity to serve their intended purpose. Since the beginning of
the 19th century, railroad wheel-tappers have used the sound of a hammer
striking the train wheel to evaluate if damage was present. In rotating
machinery, vibration monitoring has been used for decades as a
performance evaluation technique. Two techniques in the field of SHM are
wave propagation based techniques and vibration based techniques.
Broadly the literature for vibration based SHM can be divided into two
aspects, the first wherein models are proposed for the damage to
determine the dynamic characteristics, also known as the direct problem,
and the second, wherein the dynamic characteristics are used to
determine damage characteristics, also known as the inverse problem.
Several fundamental axioms, or general principles, have emerged: Axiom
I: All materials have inherent flaws or defects; Axiom II: The
assessment of damage requires a comparison between two system states;
Axiom III: Identifying the existence and location of damage can be done
in an unsupervised learning mode, but identifying the type of damage
present and the damage severity can generally only be done in a
supervised learning mode; Axiom IVa: Sensors cannot measure damage.
Feature extraction through signal processing and statistical
classification is necessary to convert sensor data into damage
information; Axiom IVb: Without intelligent feature extraction, the more
sensitive a measurement is to damage, the more sensitive it is to
changing operational and environmental conditions; Axiom V: The length-
and time-scales associated with damage initiation and evolution dictate
the required properties of the SHM sensing system; Axiom VI: There is a
trade-off between the sensitivity to damage of an algorithm and its
noise rejection capability; Axiom VII: The size of damage that can be
detected from changes in system dynamics is inversely proportional to
the frequency range of excitation.SHM System\'s elements typically
include: Structure Sensors Data acquisition systems Data transfer and
storage mechanism Data management Data interpretation and
diagnosis:System Identification Structural model update Structural
condition assessment Prediction of remaining service lifeAn example of
this technology is embedding sensors in structures like bridges and
aircraft. These sensors provide real time monitoring of various
structural changes like stress and strain. In the case of civil
engineering structures, the data provided by the sensors is usually
transmitted to a remote data acquisition centres. With the aid of modern
technology, real time control of structures (Active Structural Control)
based on the information of sensors is possible Health assessment of
engineered structures of bridges, buildings and other related
infrastructures Commonly known as Structural Health Assessment (SHA) or
SHM, this concept is widely applied to various forms of infrastructures,
especially as countries all over the world enter into an even greater
period of construction of various infrastructures ranging from bridges
to skyscrapers. Especially so when damages to structures are concerned,
it is important to note that there are stages of increasing difficulty
that require the knowledge of previous stages, namely: Detecting the
existence of the damage on the structure Locating the damage Identifying
the types of damage Quantifying the severity of the damageIt is
necessary to employ signal processing and statistical classification to
convert sensor data on the infrastructural health status into damage
info for assessment. Operational evaluation Operational evaluation
attempts to answer four questions regarding the implementation of a
damage identification capability: i) What are the life-safety and/or
economic justification for performing the SHM?ii) How is damage defined
for the system being investigated and, for multiple damage
possibilities, which cases are of the most concern?iii) What are the
conditions, both operational and environmental, under which the system
to be monitored functions?iv) What are the limitations on acquiring data
in the operational environment?Operational evaluation begins to set the
limitations on what will be monitored and how the monitoring will be
accomplished. This evaluation starts to tailor the damage identification
process to features that are unique to the system being monitored and
tries to take advantage of unique features of the damage that is to be
detected. Data acquisition, normalization and cleansing The data
acquisition portion of the SHM process involves selecting the excitation
methods, the sensor types, number and locations, and the data
acquisition/storage/transmittal hardware. Again, this process will be
application specific. Economic considerations will play a major role in
making these decisions. The intervals at which data should be collected
is another consideration that must be addressed. Because data can be
measured under varying conditions, the ability to normalize the data
becomes very important to the damage identification process. As it
applies to SHM, data normalization is the process of separating changes
in sensor reading caused by damage from those caused by varying
operational and environmental conditions. One of the most common
procedures is to normalize the measured responses by the measured
inputs. When environmental or operational variability is an issue, the
need can arise to normalize the data in some temporal fashion to
facilitate the comparison of data measured at similar times of an
environmental or operational cycle. Sources of variability in the data
acquisition process and with the system being monitored need to be
identified and minimized to the extent possible. In general, not all
sources of variability can be eliminated. Therefore, it is necessary to
make the appropriate measurements such that these sources can be
statistically quantified. Variability can arise from changing
environmental and test conditions, changes in the data reduction
process, and unit-to-unit inconsistencies. Data cleansing is the process
of selectively choosing data to pass on to or reject from the feature
selection process. The data cleansing process is usually based on
knowledge gained by individuals directly involved with the data
acquisition. As an example, an inspection of the test setup may reveal
that a sensor was loosely mounted and, hence, based on the judgment of
the individuals performing the measurement, this set of data or the data
from that particular sensor may be selectively deleted from the feature
selection process. Signal processing techniques such as filtering and
re-sampling can also be thought of as data cleansing procedures.
Finally, the data acquisition, normalization, and cleansing portion of
SHM process should not be static. Insight gained from the feature
selection process and the statistical model development process will
provide information regarding changes that can improve the data
acquisition process. Feature extraction and data compression The area of
the SHM process that receives the most attention in the technical
literature is the identification of data features that allows one to
distinguish between the undamaged and damaged structure. Inherent in
this feature selection process is the condensation of the data. The best
features for damage identification are, again, application specific. One
of the most common feature extraction methods is based on correlating
measured system response quantities, such a vibration amplitude or
frequency, with the first-hand observations of the degrading system.
Another method of developing features for damage identification is to
apply engineered flaws, similar to ones expected in actual operating
conditions, to systems and develop an initial understanding of the
parameters that are sensitive to the expected damage. The flawed system
can also be used to validate that the diagnostic measurements are
sensitive enough to distinguish between features identified from the
undamaged and damaged system. The use of analytical tools such as
experimentally-validated finite element models can be a great asset in
this process. In many cases the analytical tools are used to perform
numerical experiments where the flaws are introduced through computer
simulation. Damage accumulation testing, during which significant
structural components of the system under study are degraded by
subjecting them to realistic loading conditions, can also be used to
identify appropriate features. This process may involve induced-damage
testing, fatigue testing, corrosion growth, or temperature cycling to
accumulate certain types of damage in an accelerated fashion. Insight
into the appropriate features can be gained from several types of
analytical and experimental studies as described above and is usually
the result of information obtained from some combination of these
studies. The operational implementation and diagnostic measurement
technologies needed to perform SHM produce more data than traditional
uses of structural dynamics information. A condensation of the data is
advantageous and necessary when comparisons of many feature sets
obtained over the lifetime of the structure are envisioned. Also,
because data will be acquired from a structure over an extended period
of time and in an operational environment, robust data reduction
techniques must be developed to retain feature sensitivity to the
structural changes of interest in the presence of environmental and
operational variability. To further aid in the extraction and recording
of quality data needed to perform SHM, the statistical significance of
the features should be characterized and used in the condensation
process. Statistical model development The portion of the SHM process
that has received the least attention in the technical literature is the
development of statistical models for discrimination between features
from the undamaged and damaged structures. Statistical model development
is concerned with the implementation of the algorithms that operate on
the extracted features to quantify the damage state of the structure.
The algorithms used in statistical model development usually fall into
three categories. When data are available from both the undamaged and
damaged structure, the statistical pattern recognition algorithms fall
into the general classification category, commonly referred to as
supervised learning. Group classification and regression analysis are
categories of supervised learning algorithms. Unsupervised learning
refers to algorithms that are applied to data not containing examples
from the damaged structure. Outlier or novelty detection is the primary
class of algorithms applied in unsupervised learning applications. All
of the algorithms analyze statistical distributions of the measured or
derived features to enhance the damage identification process. Specific
structures Bridges Health monitoring of large bridges can be performed
by simultaneous measurement of loads on the bridge and effects of these
loads. It typically includes monitoring of: Wind and weather Traffic
Prestressing and stay cables Deck Pylons GroundProvided with this
knowledge, the engineer can: Estimate the loads and their effects
Estimate the state of fatigue or other limit state Forecast the probable
evolution of the bridge\'s healthThe state of Oregon in the United
States, Department of Transportation Bridge Engineering Department has
developed and implemented a Structural Health Monitoring (SHM) program
as referenced in this technical paper by Steven Lovejoy, Senior
Engineer.References are available that provide an introduction to the
application of fiber optic sensors to Structural Health Monitoring on
bridges. Examples The following projects are currently known as some of
the biggest on-going bridge monitoring Bridges in Hong Kong. The Wind
and Structural Health Monitoring System is a sophisticated bridge
monitoring system, costing US\$1.3 million, used by the Hong Kong
Highways Department to ensure road user comfort and safety of the Tsing
Ma, Ting Kau, Kap Shui Mun and Stonecutters bridges. The sensory system
consists of approximately 900 sensors and their relevant interfacing
units. With more than 350 sensors on the Tsing Ma bridge, 350 on Ting
Kau and 200 on Kap Shui Mun, the structural behaviour of the bridges is
measured 24 hours a day, seven days a week. The sensors include
accelerometers, strain gauges, displacement transducers, level sensing
stations, anemometers, temperature sensors, dynamic weight-in-motion
sensors and GPS receivers. They measure everything from tarmac
temperature and strains in structural members to wind speed and the
deflection and rotation of the kilometres of cables and any movement of
the bridge decks and towers. The Rio--Antirrio bridge, Greece: has more
than 100 sensors monitoring the structure and the traffic in real time.
Millau Viaduc, France: has one of the largest systems with fiber optics
in the world which is considered state of the art. The Huey P Long
bridge, USA: has over 800 static and dynamic strain gauges designed to
measure axial and bending load effects. The Fatih Sultan Mehmet Bridge,
Turkey: also known as the Second Bosphorus Bridge. It has been monitored
using an innovative wireless sensor network with normal traffic
condition. Masjid al-Haram#Third Saudi expansion, Mecca, Saudi Arabia :
has more than 600 sensors ( Concrete pressure cell, Embedment type
strain gauge, Sister bar strain gauge, etc.) installed at foundation and
concrete columns. This project is under construction. The Sydney Harbour
Bridge in Australia is currently implementing a monitoring system
involving over 2,400 sensors. Asset managers and bridge inspectors have
mobile and web browser decision support tools based on analysis of
sensor data. The Queensferry Crossing, currently under construction
across the Firth of Forth, will have a monitoring system including more
than 2,000 sensors upon its completion. Asset managers will have access
to data for all sensors from a web-based data management interface,
including automated data analysis. The Penang Second Bridge in Penang,
Malaysia has completed the implementation and it\'s monitoring the
bridge element with 3,000 sensors. For the safety of bridge users and as
protection of such an investment, the firm responsible for the bridge
wanted a structural health monitoring system. The system is used for
disaster control, structural health management and data analysis. There
were many considerations before implementation which included: force
(wind, earthquake, temperature, vehicles); weather (air temperature,
wind, humidity and precipitation); and response (strain, acceleration,
cable tension, displacement and tilt). The Lakhta Center, Russia: has
more than 3000 sensors and more than 8000 parameters monitoring the
structure in real time. See also Deformation monitoring Civionics
Structural Health Monitoring, a peer-reviewed journal devoted to the
subject Value of structural health information References External links
NDT.net Open Access Database contains EWSHM proceedings and much more
SHM articles International Society for Structural Health Monitoring of
Intelligent Infrastructure (ISHMII) SHM at low cost for earthquake zones
Journals SHM Proceedings (NDT.net) Journal of Structural Health
Monitoring (sagepub) Journal of Intelligent Material Systems &
Structures (sagepub) Structural Durability & Health Monitoring
(techscience) Structural Control and Health Monitoring (John Wiley &
Sons, Ltd.) Journal of Civil Structural Health Monitoring (Springer)
Smart Materials and Structures (IOP) Smart Materials Bulletin (science
direct)
