Synthography is the method of generating digital media synthetically
using machine learning. This is distinct from other graphic creation and
editing methods in that synthography uses artificial intelligence art
text-to-image models to generate synthetic media. It is commonly
achieved by prompt engineering text descriptions as input to create or
edit a desired image.Text-to-image models, algorithms, and software are
tools used in synthography that are designed to have technical
proficiency in creating the resulting artificial intelligence art output
based on human input. Synthography typically uses text-to-image models
to synthesize new images as a derivative of the training, validation,
and test data sets on which the text-to-image models were trained.
Synthography is the method used, not the output itself. The output
created specifically by generative machine learning models (as opposed
to the broader category of artificial intelligence art) are referred to
as synthographs. Those who practice synthography are referred to as
synthographers. A synthographer can harness the ability of linguistic
composition to tame a generative model. Other cases also include
fine-tuning a model on a dataset to expand its creation possibilities.
Practical uses of synthography include AI-driven product shots, stock
photography, and even magazine covers with some making predictions that
synthography may be the future of photography. Etymology From Latin
synthesis \"collection, composition\", from Greek synthesis
\"composition, a putting together\". \"-graphy\" is the word-forming
element meaning \"process of writing or recording\" or \"a writing,
recording, or description\" (in modern use especially in forming names
of descriptive sciences). From French or German -graphie, from Greek
-graphia \"description of,\" used in abstract nouns from graphein
earlier \"to draw, represent by lines drawn,\" originally \"to scrape,
scratch\" (on clay tablets with a stylus). Methodology As synthography
refers to the method of generating AI visuals, these are the mediums or
classes used in the method. (Note: text-to-speech and speech-to-text are
purposely omitted in the table since that can simply be performed by
dictation/transcription software and therefore is implied by the
\'text\' row and column. Also note that the mediums listed are of the
class of medium, not specific instances of it ie: chatbot instead of
ChatGPT.) Difference between Synthography and Artificial Intelligence
Art Synthography is the method used to create synthetic media using
generative models. Artificial intelligence art (including music,
cooking, and video game level design) is the output created using
artificial intelligence which is an overly and increasingly broad
category.When Elke Reinhuber coined the term synthography in her paper,
\"Synthography -- An Invitation to Reconsider the Rapidly Changing
Toolkit of Digital Image Creation\", she spoke of a \"legitimation
crisis\" as a need for the term. Before generative models were used,
artificial intelligence art algorithms already existed in mediums such
as graphics editing software (ie: content-aware fill, application of
artistic styles, resolution enhancement) which employs a wide range of
artificial intelligence tools, and DSLR and smartphone cameras (ie:
object recognition, in-camera focus stacking, low-light machine learning
algorithms) all of which continue to undergo rapid
development.Artificial intelligence is a superset of Machine learning.
Machine learning is a superset of neural networks. Neural networks are a
superset of generative models such as GAN\'s (generative adversarial
networks) and diffusion models. The relation between all of these is
depicted in the Venn diagram shown here. Synthography specifically uses
generative models, as popularized by software such as DALL-E,
Midjourney, and Stable Diffusion. == References ==
