Syntactic pattern recognition or structural pattern recognition is a
form of pattern recognition, in which each object can be represented by
a variable-cardinality set of symbolic, nominal features. This allows
for representing pattern structures, taking into account more complex
interrelationships between attributes than is possible in the case of
flat, numerical feature vectors of fixed dimensionality, that are used
in statistical classification. Syntactic pattern recognition can be used
instead of statistical pattern recognition if there is clear structure
in the patterns. One way to present such structure is by means of a
strings of symbols from a formal language. In this case the differences
in the structures of the classes are encoded as different grammars. An
example of this would be diagnosis of the heart with ECG measurements.
ECG waveforms can be approximated with diagonal and vertical line
segments. If normal and unhealthy waveforms can be described as formal
grammars, measured ECG signal can be classified as healthy or unhealthy
by first describing it in term of the basic line segments and then
trying to parse the descriptions according to the grammars. Another
example is tessellation of tiling patterns. A second way to represent
relations are graphs, where nodes are connected if corresponding
subpatterns are related. An item can be labeled as belonging to a class
if its graph representation is isomorphic with prototype graphs of the
class. Typically, patterns are constructed from simpler sub patterns in
a hierarchical fashion. This helps in dividing the recognition task into
easier subtask of first identifying sub patterns and only then the
actual patterns. Structural methods provide descriptions of items, which
may be useful in their own right. For example, syntactic pattern
recognition can be used to find out what objects are present in an
image. Furthermore, structural methods are strong in finding a
correspondence mapping between two images of an object. Under natural
conditions, corresponding features will be in different positions and/or
may be occluded in the two images, due to camera-attitude and
perspective, as in face recognition. A graph matching algorithm will
yield the optimal correspondence. See also Grammar induction String
matching Hopcroft--Karp algorithm Structural information theory
References Schalkoff, Robert (1992). Pattern recognition - statistical,
structural and neural approaches. John Wiley & sons. ISBN 0-471-55238-0.
Bunke, Horst (1993). Structural and syntactic pattern recognition, Chen,
Pau & Wang (Eds.) Handbook of pattern recognition & computer vision.
World Scientific. pp. 163--209. ISBN 981-02-1136-8. Flasinski, Mariusz
(2019). Syntactic pattern recognition. World Scientific. ISBN
978-981-3278-46-2.
