The current pic, which I have added to the template, is at top, and the
previous one is at bottom. I do not think the old one was very good; it
is an illustration of the contours of a human brain with a random
circuit board overlaid on it. What circuit board? We don\'t know. It
looks like there is supposed to be a pad for a CPU in the middle\... and
there is part of a ball grid array or something there\... but there is
also a gigantic randomly-shaped splotch of copper there, what is that
for? I am confident that this is not an actual PCB, nor is it a
plausible design for one, and I object to illustrating articles about
artificial intelligence with a ridiculously fake image. Conversely, I
think that an image actually created by a neural network at least has
some form of relation to the subject matter (and it is quite a bit more
abstract, so there are not objectively incorrect elements). jp√óg 14:32,
26 March 2023 (UTC) Thank you very much for the improvement, JPxG! I
always thought the previous image was at least whimsical, but I
couldn\'t think of anything better myself. Felix QW (talk) 05:43, 27
March 2023 (UTC) I think the brain-shape with electric circuits is
misleading. Beyond that, the caption contained advertising (I\'ve
removed that). If we distinguish AI (telelogical, the idea of performing
human-type tasks) from ML (methodological, like statistics), it should
demonstrate a machine performing a \"human-type\" tasks. Bquast (talk)
16:27, 21 April 2023 (UTC)
