In linguistics, a corpus (plural corpora) or text corpus is a language
resource consisting of a large and structured set of texts (nowadays
usually electronically stored and processed). In corpus linguistics,
they are used to do statistical analysis and hypothesis testing,
checking occurrences or validating linguistic rules within a specific
language territory. In search technology, a corpus is the collection of
documents which is being searched. Overview A corpus may contain texts
in a single language (monolingual corpus) or text data in multiple
languages (multilingual corpus). In order to make the corpora more
useful for doing linguistic research, they are often subjected to a
process known as annotation. An example of annotating a corpus is
part-of-speech tagging, or POS-tagging, in which information about each
word\'s part of speech (verb, noun, adjective, etc.) is added to the
corpus in the form of tags. Another example is indicating the lemma
(base) form of each word. When the language of the corpus is not a
working language of the researchers who use it, interlinear glossing is
used to make the annotation bilingual. Some corpora have further
structured levels of analysis applied. In particular, smaller corpora
may be fully parsed. Such corpora are usually called Treebanks or Parsed
Corpora. The difficulty of ensuring that the entire corpus is completely
and consistently annotated means that these corpora are usually smaller,
containing around one to three million words. Other levels of linguistic
structured analysis are possible, including annotations for morphology,
semantics and pragmatics. Applications Corpora are the main knowledge
base in corpus linguistics. Other notable areas of application include:
Language technology, natural language processing, computational
linguistics The analysis and processing of various types of corpora are
also the subject of much work in computational linguistics, speech
recognition and machine translation, where they are often used to create
hidden Markov models for part of speech tagging and other purposes.
Corpora and frequency lists derived from them are useful for language
teaching. Corpora can be considered as a type of foreign language
writing aid as the contextualised grammatical knowledge acquired by
non-native language users through exposure to authentic texts in corpora
allows learners to grasp the manner of sentence formation in the target
language, enabling effective writing.Machine translation Multilingual
corpora that have been specially formatted for side-by-side comparison
are called aligned parallel corpora. There are two main types of
parallel corpora which contain texts in two languages. In a translation
corpus, the texts in one language are translations of texts in the other
language. In a comparable corpus, the texts are of the same kind and
cover the same content, but they are not translations of each other. To
exploit a parallel text, some kind of text alignment identifying
equivalent text segments (phrases or sentences) is a prerequisite for
analysis. Machine translation algorithms for translating between two
languages are often trained using parallel fragments comprising a
first-language corpus and a second-language corpus, which is an
element-for-element translation of the first-language corpus.Philologies
Text corpora are also used in the study of historical documents, for
example in attempts to decipher ancient scripts, or in Biblical
scholarship. Some archaeological corpora can be of such short duration
that they provide a snapshot in time. One of the shortest corpora in
time may be the 15--30 year Amarna letters texts (1350 BC). The corpus
of an ancient city, (for example the \"KÃ¼ltepe Texts\" of Turkey), may
go through a series of corpora, determined by their find site dates.
Some notable text corpora See also Concordance Corpus linguistics
Distributional--relational database Linguistic Data Consortium Natural
language processing Natural Language Toolkit Parallel text alignment
Search engines: they access the \"web corpus\". Speech corpus
Translation memory Treebank Zipf\'s Law References External links ACL
SIGLEX Resource Links: Text Corpora Archived 2013-08-13 at the Wayback
Machine Developing Linguistic Corpora: a Guide to Good Practice Free
samples (not free), web-based corpora (45-425 million words each):
American (COCA, COHA, TIME), British (BNC), Spanish, Portuguese
Intercorp Building synchronous parallel corpora of the languages taught
at the Faculty of Arts of Charles University. Sketch Engine: Open
corpora with free access TS Corpus -- A Turkish Corpus freely available
for academic research. Turkish National Corpus -- A general-purpose
corpus for contemporary Turkish Corpus of Political Speeches, Free
access to political speeches by American and Chinese politicians,
developed by Hong Kong Baptist University Library Russian National
Corpus
