The Register is a British technology news website co-founded in 1994 by
Mike Magee, John Lettice, and Ross Alderson. The online newspaper\'s
masthead sublogo is \"Biting the hand that feeds IT.\" Their primary
focus is information technology news and opinions. Situation Publishing
Ltd is listed as the site\'s publisher. Drew Cullen is an owner and
Linus Birtles is the managing director. Andrew Orlowski was the
executive editor before leaving the website in May 2019. History The
Register was founded in London as an email newsletter called Chip
Connection. In 1998 The Register became a daily online news source.
Magee left in 2001 to start competing publications The Inquirer, and
later the IT Examiner and TechEye.In 2002, The Register expanded to have
a presence in London and San Francisco, creating The Register USA at
theregus.com through a joint venture with Tom\'s Hardware. In 2003, that
site moved to theregister.com. That content was later merged onto
theregister.co.uk. The Register carries syndicated content including
Simon Travaglia\'s BOFH stories.In 2010 The Register supported the
successful launch of the Paper Aircraft Released into Space, a project
they announced in 2009 that released a paper plane in the extreme upper
atmosphere.The Register also ran the websites Register Hardware and
Channel Register, which merged into The Register. Readership and content
In 2011 it was read daily by over 350,000 users according to the Audit
Bureau of Circulations, rising to 468,000 daily and nearly 9.5 million
monthly in 2013. In November 2011 the UK and US each accounted for
approximately 42% and 34% of page impressions respectively, with Canada
being the next most significant origin of page hits at 3%. In 2012 the
UK and US accounted for approximately 41% and 28% of page impressions
respectively, with Canada at 3.61%.Channel Register covers computer
business and trade news, which includes business press releases. News
and articles for computer hardware and consumer electronics are covered
by Reg Hardware. Reg Research is an in-depth resource on technologies
and how they relate to business.Their stories are cited by major news
sources and also used for backup information. Stories in other
periodicals were based on their expos√©s. InformationWeek ran a story
about TheRegister\'s story about a New York Times article.In September
2018, the Alexa ranking was #7,194. Writers The Register has an
editorial staff of 16 writers and production experts. Chris Williams is
editor-in-chief. Paul Kunert is UK editor, Iain Thomson is US news
editor and Simon Sharwood is Asia-Pacific editor. Columnists include
Mark Pesce and Rupert Goodwins. Intel chips flaw investigation On 6
February 2017, The Register was the first news outlet to accurately
trace a recently discovered flaw in Cisco (and other makers) gear to a
serious defect on Intel\'s Atom C2000 series processors. Around 3
January 2018, The Register broke news about Google\'s long-ongoing
investigation into Intel\'s processor design, which revealed that a
serious flaw in the design of their chips would require Microsoft,
Apple, and Linux developers to release patches for their operating
systems. Criticism The Register has published both headlines and stories
that have generated controversy. The Guardian accused The Register of
misunderstanding climate science and misrepresenting a paper in the
journal Nature in a manner that deliberately minimized the climate
impact of human emissions. References External links Official website
\"Archive of articles about Wikipedia\". The Register.
