Trevor John Hastie (born 27 June 1953) is an American statistician and
computer scientist. He is currently serving as the John A. Overdeck
Professor of Mathematical Sciences and Professor of Statistics at
Stanford University. Hastie is known for his contributions to applied
statistics, especially in the field of machine learning, data mining,
and bioinformatics. He has authored several popular books in statistical
learning, including The Elements of Statistical Learning: Data Mining,
Inference, and Prediction. Hastie has been listed as an ISI Highly Cited
Author in Mathematics by the ISI Web of Knowledge. Education and career
Hastie was born on 27 June 1953 in South Africa. He received his B.S. in
statistics from the Rhodes University in 1976 and master\'s degree from
University of Cape Town in 1979. Hastie joined the doctoral program at
Stanford University in 1980 and received his Ph.D. in 1984 under the
supervision of Werner Stuetzle. His dissertation was \"Principal Curves
and Surfaces\".Hastie began his professional career in 1977 with the
South African Medical Research Council. After receiving his master\'s
degree in 1979, he spent a year interning at the London School of
Hygiene & Tropical Medicine, the Johnson Space Center in Houston, and
the Biomath department at Oxford University. After receiving his
doctoral degree from Stanford, Hastie returned to South Africa to work
with his former employer South African Medical Research Council. He
returned to United States in 1986 and joined the AT&T Bell Laboratories
in Murray Hill, New Jersey and remained there for nine years. He joined
Stanford University in 1994 as Associate Professor in Statistics and
Biostatistics. He was promoted to full Professor in 1999. During the
period 2006--2009, he was the chair of the Department of Statistics at
Stanford University. In 2013 he was named the John A. Overdeck Professor
of Mathematical Sciences. Awards and honors Hastie is a Fellow of the
Royal Statistical Society since 1979. He is also an elected Fellow of
several professional and scholarly societies, including the Institute of
Mathematical Statistics, the American Statistical Association, and the
South African Statistical Society. He is a recipient of \'Myrto
Lefkopolou Distinguished Lectureship\' award of Biostatistics Department
at the Harvard School of Public Health. In 2018, he was elected a member
of the National Academy of Sciences. In 2019 Hastie became a foreign
member of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences.
Publications Hastie is a prolific author of scientific works on various
topics in applied statistics, including statistical learning, data
mining, statistical computing, and bioinformatics. He along with his
collaborators has authored about 125 scientific articles. Many of
Hastie\'s scientific articles were coauthored by his longtime
collaborator, Robert Tibshirani. Hastie has been listed as an ISI Highly
Cited Author in Mathematics by the ISI Web of Knowledge. He has
coauthored the following books: T. Hastie and R. Tibshirani, Generalized
Additive Models, Chapman and Hall, 1990. J. Chambers and T. Hastie,
Statistical Models in S, Wadsworth/Brooks Cole, 1991. T. Hastie, R.
Tibshirani, and J. Friedman, The Elements of Statistical Learning:
Prediction, Inference and Data Mining, Second Edition, Springer Verlag,
2009 (available for free from the author\'s website). G. James, D.
Witten, T. Hastie, R. Tibshirani, An Introduction to Statistical
Learning with Applications in R, Springer Verlag, 2013 (available for
free from the co-author\'s website). T. Hastie, R. Tibshirani, M.
Wainwright, Statistical Learning with Sparsity: the Lasso and
Generalizations, CRC Press, 2015 (available for free from the author\'s
website). Bradley Efron; Trevor Hastie (2016). Computer Age Statistical
Inference. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 9781107149892. References
External links Media related to Trevor Hastie at Wikimedia Commons
Official website Trevor Hastie at the Mathematics Genealogy Project
