Uber Technologies, Inc. (Uber), based in San Francisco, provides
mobility as a service/ride-hailing (48% of revenues), food
delivery/package delivery/couriers via Uber Eats and Postmates (34% of
revenues), and freight transport (18% of revenues). Uber sets fares,
which vary using a dynamic pricing model based on local supply and
demand at the time of the booking and are quoted to the customer in
advance, and receives a commission from each booking. It has operations
in approximately 70 countries and 10,500 cities and, with 131 million
monthly active users and 5.4 million active drivers and couriers
worldwide, it generates an average of 23 million trips per day.Like
other ridesharing companies, Uber classifies its drivers as gig workers
and independent contractors, where allowable, which is the subject of
legal action in several jurisdictions. Ridesharing companies have
disrupted taxicab businesses and allegedly caused an increase in traffic
congestion. Ridesharing companies are regulated in many jurisdictions
and the Uber platform is not available in several countries where the
company is not able or willing to comply with regulations. Controversies
involving Uber include various unethical practices such as aggressive
lobbying and ignoring and evading local regulations. Many of these were
revealed by a leak of documents showing controversial activity between
2013 and 2017 under the leadership of Travis Kalanick. History In 2009,
Garrett Camp, a co-founder of StumbleUpon, came up with the idea to
create Uber to make it easier and cheaper to procure direct
transportation. Camp and Travis Kalanick had spent \$800 hiring a
private driver on New Year\'s Eve, which they deemed excessive, and Camp
was also inspired by his difficulty in finding a taxi on a snowy night
in Paris. The prototype of the mobile app was built by Camp and his
friends, Oscar Salazar and Conrad Whelan, with Kalanick as the \"mega
advisor\" to the company.In February 2010, Ryan Graves became the first
Uber employee; he was named chief executive officer (CEO) in May 2010.
In December 2010, Kalanick succeeded Graves as CEO and Graves became the
chief operating officer.Following a beta launch in May 2010, Uber\'s
services and mobile app launched publicly in San Francisco in 2011.
Originally, the application only allowed users to hail a black luxury
car and the price was approximately 1.5 times that of a taxi. In 2011,
the company changed its name from UberCab to Uber after complaints from
San Francisco taxicab operators.The company\'s early hires included a
nuclear physicist, a computational neuroscientist, and a machinery
expert who worked on predicting arrival times for Uber\'s cars more
accurately than Google APIs. In April 2012, Uber launched a service in
Chicago, whereby users were able to request a regular taxi or an Uber
driver via its mobile app.In July 2012, the company introduced UberX, a
cheaper option that allowed drivers to use non-luxury vehicles,
including their personal vehicles, subject to a background check,
insurance, registration, and vehicle standards. By December 2013, the
service was operating in 65 cities.In December 2013, USA Today named
Uber its tech company of the year.In August 2014, Uber launched a shared
transport service in the San Francisco Bay Area and launched Uber Eats,
a food delivery service. In August 2016, facing tough competition, Uber
sold its operations in China to DiDi in exchange for an 18% stake in
DiDi. DiDi agreed to invest \$1 billion in Uber. Uber had started
operations in China in 2014, under the name 优步 (Yōubù).In 2016, Uber
acquired Ottomotto, a self-driving truck company founded by Anthony
Levandowski, for \$625 million. Levandowski, previously employed by
Waymo, allegedly founded Ottomotto using trade secrets he stole from
Waymo. Uber settled a lawsuit regarding the use of such intellectual
property and reached a deal to use Waymo\'s technology for its freight
transport operations.In December 2016, Uber acquired Geometric
Intelligence. Geometric Intelligence\'s 15 person staff formed the
initial core of \"Uber AI\", a division for researching AI technologies
and machine learning. Uber AI created multiple open source projects,
such as Pyro, Ludwig, and Plato. Uber AI also developed new AI
techniques and algorithms, such as the POET algorithm and a sequence of
papers on neuroevolution. Uber AI was shut down in May 2020.In August
2017, Dara Khosrowshahi, the former CEO of Expedia Group, replaced
Kalanick as CEO.In February 2018, Uber combined its operations in
Russia, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia and Kazakhstan with those
of Yandex.Taxi and invested \$225 million in the venture. In March 2018,
Uber merged its services in Southeast Asia with those of Grab in
exchange for a 27.5% ownership stake in Grab.Between May 2018 and
November 2018, Uber offered Uber Rent powered by Getaround, a
peer-to-peer carsharing service available to some users in San
Francisco.In November 2018, Uber became a gold member of the Linux
Foundation.On May 10, 2019, Uber became a public company via an initial
public offering.In the summer of 2019, Uber announced layoffs of 8% of
its staff and eliminated the position of COO Barney Harford.In October
2019, in partnership with HeliFlight, Uber offered 8-minute helicopter
flights between Manhattan and John F. Kennedy International Airport for
\$200-\$225 per passenger.Between October 2019 and May 2020, Uber
offered Uber Works, a mobile app connecting workers who wanted temporary
jobs with businesses in Chicago and Miami.In January 2020, Uber acquired
Careem for \$3.1 billion and sold its Indian Uber Eats operations to
Zomato.Also in January 2020, Uber tested a feature that enabled drivers
at the Santa Barbara, Sacramento, and Palm Springs airports to set fares
based on a multiple of Uber\'s rates.In May 2020, during the COVID-19
pandemic, Uber announced layoffs of over 14% of its workforce.In June
2020, in its first software as a service partnership, Uber announced
that it would manage the on-demand high-occupancy vehicle fleet for
Marin Transit, a public bus agency in Marin County, California.In July
2020, Uber, in partnership with its majority-owned Cornershop, launched
Uber grocery delivery service in Latin America, Canada, Miami, and
Dallas.In September 2020, Uber committed to carbon neutrality globally
by 2040, and required that, by 2030, in most countries, rides must be
offered exclusively in electric vehicles.In December 2020, Uber acquired
Postmates for \$2.65 billion.Also in December 2020, Uber sold its
Elevate division, which was developing short flights using VTOL
aircraft, to Joby Aviation.In January 2021, Uber ATG/Advanced
Technologies Group, a joint venture minority-owned by SoftBank Vision
Fund, Toyota, and Denso that was developing self-driving cars, was sold
to Aurora Innovation for \$4 billion in equity and Uber invested \$400
million into Aurora.In March 2021, the company moved to a new
headquarters on Third Street in Mission Bay, San Francisco, consisting
of several 6- and 11-story buildings connected by bridges and
walkways.In October 2021, Uber acquired Drizly, an alcohol delivery
service, for \$1.1 billion in cash and stock.On January 20, 2022, Uber
acquired Australian car-sharing company Car Next Door.In May 2022, Uber
began operations in Italy, forming a partnership with IT Taxi, Italy\'s
largest taxi dispatcher, to integrate the dispatcher\'s drivers with the
Uber platform. Uber had previously done similar deals in Spain, Germany,
Austria, Turkey, South Korea, Hong Kong, and New York.On September 15,
2022, Uber discovered a security breach of its internal network by a
hacker that utilized social engineering to obtain an employee\'s
credentials and gain access to the company\'s VPN and intranet. The
company said that no sensitive data had been compromised.In May 2023,
Shin-Pei Tsay, Uber's head of Cities & Transportation Policy, announced
the company's expansion of the ride-share program. The said program will
include 5 more cities---Baltimore, Miami, Nashville, Philadelphia, and
Washington, D.C. Uber has not yet provided a specific time frame for the
expansion. Finances Uber has posted hundreds of millions or billions of
dollars in losses each year since 2014 except for 2018, when it exited
from the markets in Russia, China, and Southeast Asia in exchange for
stakes in rival businesses. Uber had 32.11 billion USD worth of assets,
24.03 billion USD in liabilities, and 32,800 employees in 2022.
Controversies Ignoring and evading local regulations Uber has been
criticized for its strategy of generally commencing operations in a city
without regard for local regulations. If faced with regulatory
opposition, Uber called for public support for its service and mounted a
political campaign, supported by lobbying, to change regulations. Uber
argued that it is \"a technology company\" and not a taxi company, and
therefore it was not subject to regulations affecting taxi companies.
Uber\'s strategy was generally to \"seek forgiveness rather than
permission\". In 2014, with regards to airport pickups without a permit
in California, drivers were actually told to ignore local regulations
and that the company would pay for any citations. Uber\'s response to
California Assembly Bill 5 (2019), whereby it announced that it would
not comply with the law, then engaged lobbyists and mounted an expensive
public opinion campaign to overturn it via a ballot, was cited as an
example of this policy. Taxi companies sued Uber in numerous American
cities, alleging that Uber\'s policy of violating taxi regulations was a
form of unfair competition or a violation of antitrust law. Although
some courts did find that Uber intentionally violated the taxi rules,
Uber prevailed in every case, including the only case to proceed to
trial.In March 2017, an investigation by The New York Times revealed
that Uber developed a software tool called \"Greyball\" to avoid giving
rides to known law enforcement officers in areas where its service was
illegal such as in Portland, Oregon, Australia, South Korea, and China.
The tool identified government officials using geofencing, mining credit
card databases, identifying devices, and searches of social media. While
at first, Uber stated that it only used the tool to identify riders that
violated its terms of service, after investigations by Portland, Oregon,
and the United States Department of Justice, Uber admitted to using the
tool to skirt local regulations and promised not to use the tool for
that purpose. The use of Greyball in London was cited by Transport for
London as one of the reasons for its decision not to renew Uber\'s
private hire operator licence in September 2017. A January 2018 report
by Bloomberg News stated that Uber routinely used a \"panic button\"
system, codenamed \"Ripley\", that locked, powered off and changed
passwords on staff computers when those offices were subjected to
government raids. Uber allegedly used this button at least 24 times,
from spring 2015 until late 2016. Counter-intelligence research on class
action plaintiffs In 2016 Uber hired the global security consulting firm
Ergo to secretly investigate plaintiffs involved in a class action
lawsuit. Ergo operatives posed as acquaintances of the plaintiff\'s
counsel and tried to contact their associates to obtain information that
could be used against them. The result of which was found out causing
the judge to throw out evidence obtained as obtained in a fraudulent
manner. Sexual harassment allegations and management shakeup (2017) On
February 19, 2017, former Uber engineer Susan Fowler published on her
website that she was propositioned for sex by a manager and subsequently
threatened with termination of employment by another manager if she
continued to report the incident. Kalanick was alleged to have been
aware of the complaint. On February 27, 2017, Amit Singhal, Uber\'s
Senior Vice President of Engineering, was forced to resign after he
failed to disclose a sexual harassment claim against him that occurred
while he served as Vice President of Google Search. After investigations
led by former attorney general Eric Holder and Arianna Huffington, a
member of Uber\'s board of directors, in June 2017, Uber fired over 20
employees. Kalanick took an indefinite leave of absence but, under
pressure from investors, he resigned as CEO a week later. Also departing
the company in June 2017 was Emil Michael, a senior vice president who
suggested that Uber hire a team of opposition researchers and
journalists, with a million-dollar budget, to \"dig up dirt\" on the
personal lives and backgrounds of journalists who reported negatively on
Uber, specifically targeting Sarah Lacy, editor of PandoDaily, who, in
an article published in October 2014, accused Uber of sexism and
misogyny in its advertising. In August 2018, Uber agreed to pay a total
of \$7 million to settle claims of gender discrimination, harassment,
and hostile work environment, with 480 employees and former employees
receiving \$10,700 each and 56 of those employees and former employees
receiving an additional \$33,900 each. In December 2019, Kalanick
resigned from the board of directors of the company and sold his shares.
Delayed disclosure of data breaches On February 27, 2015, Uber admitted
that it had suffered a data breach more than nine months prior. Names
and license plate information from approximately 50,000 drivers were
inadvertently disclosed. Uber discovered this leak in September 2014,
but waited more than five months to notify the affected individuals.An
announcement in November 2017 revealed that in 2016, a separate data
breach had disclosed the personal information of 600,000 drivers and 57
million customers. This data included names, email addresses, phone
numbers, and drivers\' license information. Hackers used employees\'
usernames and passwords that had been compromised in previous breaches
(a \"credential stuffing\" method) to gain access to a private GitHub
repository used by Uber\'s developers. The hackers located credentials
for the company\'s Amazon Web Services datastore in the repository
files, and were able to obtain access to the account records of users
and drivers, as well as other data contained in over 100 Amazon S3
buckets. Uber paid a \$100,000 ransom to the hackers on the promise they
would delete the stolen data. Uber was subsequently criticized for
concealing this data breach. Khosrowshahi publicly apologized. In
September 2018, in the largest multi-state settlement of a data breach,
Uber paid \$148 million to the Federal Trade Commission, admitted that
its claim that internal access to consumers\' personal information was
closely monitored on an ongoing basis was false, and stated that it had
failed to live up to its promise to provide reasonable security for
consumer data. Also in November 2018, Uber\'s British divisions were
fined £385,000 (reduced to £308,000) by the Information Commissioner\'s
Office.In 2020, the US Department of Justice announced criminal charges
against former Chief Security Officer Joe Sullivan for obstruction of
justice. The criminal complaint said Sullivan arranged, with Kalanick\'s
knowledge, to pay a ransom for the 2016 breach as a \"bug bounty\" to
conceal its true nature, and for the hackers to falsify non-disclosure
agreements to say they had not obtained any data. Privacy In July 2017,
Uber received a five-star privacy rating from the Electronic Frontier
Foundation, but was harshly criticised by the group in September 2017
for a controversial policy of tracking customers\' locations even after
a ride ended, forcing the company to reverse its policy. 2022 leak
documenting misdeeds More than 124,000 Uber documents covering the
five-year period from 2012 to 2017 when Uber was run by its co-founder
Travis Kalanick were leaked by Mark MacGann, a lobbyist who \"led
Uber\'s efforts to win over governments across Europe, the Middle East
and Africa\", to The Guardian newspaper and first printed on 10 July
2022 by its Sunday sister The Observer. The documents revealed attempts
to lobby Joe Biden, Olaf Scholz and George Osborne; how Emmanuel Macron
secretly aided Uber lobbying in France, and use of a kill switch during
police raids to conceal data. Kalanick dismissed concerns from other
executives that sending Uber drivers to a protest in France put them at
risk of violence from angry opponents in the taxi industry, saying \"I
think it\'s worth it, violence guarantees success\". References Further
reading Scholarly papers Laurell, Christofer; Sandström, Christian (June
28, 2016). \"Analysing Uber in social media -- disruptive technology or
institutional disruption?\". International Journal of Innovation
Management. 20 (5): 1640013. doi:10.1142/S1363919616400132. McGaughey,
E. (2018). \"Uber, the Taylor Review, mutuality, and the duty to not
misrepresent employment status\". Industrial Law Journal. SSRN 3018516.
Petropoulos, Georgios (February 22, 2016). \"Uber and the economic
impact of sharing economy platforms\". Bruegel. Noto La Diega, Guido
(2016). \"Uber law and awareness by design. An empirical study on online
platforms and dehumanised negotiations\" (PDF). Revue européenne de
droit de la consommation/ European Journal of Consumer Law. 2016 (II):
383--413 -- via Northumbria Research Link. Oitaven, Juliana Carreiro
Corbal; Carelli, Rodrigo de Lacerda; Casagrande, Cássio Luís (2019).
Empresas de transporte, plataformas digitais e a relação de emprego: um
estudo do trabalho subordinado sob aplicativos (PDF) (in Portuguese).
Brasília: Ministério Público do Trabalho. ISBN 978-8566507270. Rogers,
B. (2015). \"The Social Costs of Uber\". University of Chicago Law
Review Dialogue. 82: 85.Books Isaac, Mike (2019). Super Pumped: The
Battle for Uber. New York. ISBN 978-0393652246. OCLC 1090686951 Stone,
Brad (2017). The Upstarts : How Uber, Airbnb, and the Killer Companies
of the New Silicon Valley are Changing the World (1st ed.). New York.
ISBN 978-0-316-38839-9. OCLC 953598607.Articles The Uber whistleblower:
I'm exposing a system that sold people a lie. The Guardian. July 11,
2022. Further viewing Playing by the Rules: Ethics at Work: Season 3
Episode 1: \"Driven\" PBS External links Official website Business data
for Uber Inc.:
