User behavior analytics (UBA) or User and Entity Behavior Analytics
(UEBA), is the concept of analyzing the behavior of users, subjects,
visitors, etc. for a specific purpose. Il allows cybersecurity tools to
build a profile of each individual\'s normal activity, by looking at
patterns of human behavior, and then highlighting deviations from that
profile (or anomalies) that may indicate a potential compromise. Purpose
of UBA The purpose of UBA According to Johna Till Johnson from Nemertes
Research, Security systems provide so much information that it\'s tough
to uncover information that truly indicates a potential for a real
attack. Analytics tools help make sense of the vast amount of data that
SIEM, IDS/IPS, system logs, and other tools gather. UBA tools use a
specialized type of security analytics that focuses on the behavior of
systems and the people using them. UBA technology first evolved in the
field of marketing, to help companies understand and predict
consumer-buying patterns. But as it turns out, UBA can be
extraordinarily useful in the security context too.\" Distinction
between UBA and UEBA The E in UEBA extends the analysis to include
entity activities that take place but that are not necessarily directly
linked or tied to a user\'s specific actions but that can still
correlate to a vulnerability, reconnaissance, intrusion breach or
exploit occurrence.The term UEBA was coined by Gartner in 2015. UEBA
tracks the activity of devices, applications, servers and data. UEBA
systems produce more data and provide more complex reporting options
than UBA systems. Difference with EDR UEBA Tools differ from Endpoint
detection and response (EDR) capabilities in that UEBA is an analytic
focus on the user whereas EDR has an analytic focus on the endpoint. See
also Behavioral analytics Network behavior anomaly detection User
activity monitoring References External links ABC\'s Of UBA
