Vinod Khosla (born 28 January 1955) is an Indian-American businessman
and venture capitalist. He is a co-founder of Sun Microsystems and the
founder of Khosla Ventures. Khosla made his wealth from early venture
capital investments in areas such as networking, software, and
alternative energy technologies. He is considered one of the most
successful and influential venture capitalists.In 2014, Forbes counted
him among the 400 richest people in the United States. In 2021, he was
ranked 92nd on the Forbes 400 list. Biography Khosla was born on January
28, 1955, in Pune, India. Khosla\'s father was an officer in the Indian
Army and was posted at New Delhi, India. His father wanted him to also
join the army. He attended Mount St Mary\'s School for elementary
school. Khosla became interested in entrepreneurship after reading about
the founding of Intel in Electronic Engineering Times as a teenager, and
this inspired him to pursue technology as a career. According to Khosla,
he was inspired by Intel co-founder Andrew Grove, a Hungarian immigrant
that got funding for Intel in Silicon Valley, when it was a startup.From
1971 to 1976, Khosla attended IIT Delhi where he earned a bachelor\'s
degree in electrical engineering. He started the first computer club in
any IIT to do computer programming and operated the school\'s computer
center while the operations staff were on strike. He also wrote a paper
on parallel processing as a teenager before the concept was adopted by
the IT industry, and helped to start the first biomedical engineering
program in India. In 1975, Khosla attempted to start a soy milk company
intended to provide a milk alternative to Indian consumers that do not
have refrigerators to preserve cow milk.Khosla received a master\'s in
biomedical engineering from Carnegie Mellon University on a full
scholarship. He applied to Stanford University\'s MBA program but was
rejected for lack of work experience. He had two full-time jobs while
finishing his master\'s for the two years of work experience, but was
rejected a second time. Three weeks into starting at Carnegie Mellon for
his MBA, Khosla convinced the admissions staff to accept him into
Stanford Graduate School of Business and received an MBA in 1980.He is
married to Neeru Khosla, his childhood girlfriend. They have four
children. Career Early businesses and investments After completing his
MBA at Stanford in 1980, Khosla developed a business plan for an
electronic design automation company for electrical engineers. He was
introduced to employees at Intel and became the first full-time founder
and Chief Financial Officer of Daisy Systems. The company spent 80
percent of its resources on building custom computer hardware that could
run its software. As a result, Khosla left the company in order to
create a startup that manufactures general purpose computers. In 1981,
Khosla co-founded Data Dump with a former Stanford classmate, which
ended up failing.In 1982, Khosla co-founded Sun Microsystems (SUN is the
acronym for the Stanford University Network), along with Stanford
classmates Scott McNealy, Andy Bechtolsheim, who was licensing a
computer design to local companies. UC Berkeley computer science
graduate student Bill Joy later joined the company as co-founder. Sun
Microsystems sold servers to the universities they graduated from and
other colleges, desktop computers, and created the Java programming
language. Khosla raised \$300,000 in seed capital from venture capital
firm Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Byers. Within five years, Sun made \$1
billion in annual sales. Khosla also recruited early executives and
developers such as Eric Schmidt and Carol Bartz. He served as the first
chairman and CEO from 1982 to 1984, when he left the company to become a
venture capitalist.In 1986, Khosla joined the venture capital firm
Kleiner Perkins as a general partner. At Kleiner Perkins, Khosla managed
investments in technologies, such as video games and semiconductors.He
helped create Nexgen, sold to AMD for 28 percent of its market cap,
which was the first successful Intel microprocessor clone company. He
invested in Go Corporation, which developed a stylus-operated computer
and was seen as one of the largest Silicon Valley startup failures. In
1994, he suggested that Excite adapt its search engine for the internet
and helped finance the special disk drive the company needed to run
their search engine. He mentored the founders until the company was sold
to \@Home Network for \$7 billion, which was it his first venture
capital deal of that size. Afterwards, Khosla was an early proponent of
fiber optics and the internet for faster communication and started
focusing on telecommunication networking companies.He incubated Juniper
Networks and suggested that it develop an \"Internet router instead of
the plain vanilla router mostly used.\" Khosla invested \$275,000, which
became his largest return on investment to date. A \$3 million
investment in Juniper Networks in the 1990s earned \$7 billion for
Kleiner Perkins according to The Wall Street Journal. He also incubated
Cerent Corporation in 1996, which sold to Cisco for \$7.8 billion, and
Siara, which sold for \$3 billion and was its chief executive officer
for its first year. Development of Khosla Ventures In 2004 to spend more
time with his teenage kids and focus on technology startups, Khosla
moved to part-time and eventually left Kleiner Perkins. He founded his
own venture capital firm, Khosla Ventures later that year as a way to
invest in more experimental technologies with a \"social impact.\" At
the time, he had about \$1.5 billion from co-founding Sun Microsystems
and his work with Kleiner Perkins. The firm is based in Menlo Park,
California.Khosla was featured on Dateline NBC in May 2006, where he
discussed the practicality of ethanol as a gasoline substitute. He has
invested heavily in ethanol companies.The firm became known for large,
early investments in alternative energy technology like solar, biofuel,
and batteries. He has advocated for breakthroughs in these \"clean\"
energies rather than cutting back on energy consumption. The firm
incubated carbon recycling and aviation fuel company LanzaTech and
QuantumScape, a solid state battery company. Khosla has stated both
Quantumscape and Lanzatech are unicorns that have taken time and calls
them part of \"clean tech 1.0.\" He believes carbon sequestration is an
area that needs significant advancements and is the most feasible.
Impossible Foods, which works to make meat a more efficient energy
source, and View Glass are also unicorns incubated by Khosla Ventures.
Business Insider reported that it took 10 years to return \"more than a
billion dollars\" to the firm, similar to some of Khosla\'s other
successful investments that also took a decade to pay off. Khosla
believes that a dozen dramatic technologies to solve climate change and
it is inaccurate to continue cleantech investing as a bust.In September
2009, Khosla Ventures III secured \$750 million of investor commitments
to invest in traditional early-stage and growth-stage companies. Khosla
also raised \$250 million for Khosla Seed, which will invest in
higher-risk opportunities. He opened up Khosla Ventures to outside
investors for the first time that same year. Beginning in 2010, Khosla
Ventures began investing in food and was the first investor in companies
like Instacart and DoorDash. Fintech was also an area of focus with
early investments. In May 2010, it was announced that former British
Prime Minister Tony Blair was to join Khosla Ventures to provide
strategic advice regarding investments in technologies focused on the
environment. During this time, Khosla had hired Condoleezza Rice\'s
advisory firm to work with portfolio companies. In 2012, Khosla wrote an
article titled \"Do We Need Doctors Or Algorithms?\" arguing the
increasing importance of artificial intelligence in medicine claiming
\"bionic assistance\" will eventually replace most doctors. He started
investing in medicine and robotics, such as companies that use
artificial intelligence in medical treatments at that time. Khosla
Ventures also invested in HackerRank. In 2018, Khosla stated the plan
for the rest of his life was to \"reinvent societal infrastructure\"
through innovation and technology such as 3D-printing houses for the
homeless. Khosla has stated \"we need 1,000% change if billions of
people in China and India are to enjoy a Western, energy-rich
lifestyle.\" He invests in \"black swan\" technologies that have a high
chance of failure but if successful, would have environmental and
societal benefits. In 2019, Khosla presented \"Amazing: What KV Founders
are Doing,\" which described 100 portfolio companies reinventing areas
such as health, infrastructure, robotics, transportation, augmented
reality and artificial intelligence.Khosla Ventures manages
approximately \$15 billion of investor capital as well as investments
funded by Khosla himself. Views Capitalism Khosla believes in using
capitalism as a solution for social impact due to its ability to scale,
which is something he does not believe is possible with non-profit
organizations. He has insisted economical, large-scale solutions will
succeed when facing global warming as well. Khosla has stated that
machine learning technology will replace many jobs and increase income
disparities however will also create enough GDP to provide basic income
to everyone. Politics Khosla has donated to a mix of Democrats and
Republicans and supports politicians based on their climate policies. He
is a Democrat and has donated to organizations that support left-leaning
politics. In 2013, Khosla hosted Barack Obama for a fundraising dinner
at his home in Portola Valley.Khosla was a major proponent of the \"Yes
on 87\" campaign to pass California\'s Proposition 87, The Clean Energy
Initiative, which failed to pass in November 2006. Khosla endorsed
Democratic candidate Hillary Clinton in the 2016 U.S. presidential
election. Philanthropy and affiliations Khosla was honorary chair of the
DonorsChoose San Francisco Bay Area advisory board. In 2000, Khosla was
a recipient of the Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of
Achievement. In 2006, Khosla\'s wife Neeru co-founded the CK-12
Foundation, which aims to develop open-source textbooks and lower the
cost of education in the US and the rest of the world. Khosla and his
wife are donors to the Wikimedia Foundation, in the amount of
\$600,000.In 2007, Khosla was an award recipient in the Northern
California region for the EY Entrepreneur of the Year award. Khosla was
a member of the board of trustees of the Blum Center for Developing
Economies at the University of California, Berkeley. The center is
focused on finding solutions to address the crisis of extreme poverty
and disease in the developing world. He is an advisor for HackerRank, a
website for competitive coding.He is also one of the founders of TiE,
The Indus Entrepreneurs, and has guest-edited a special issue of The
Economic Times, a business newspaper in India.He is involved with
organizations that provide microfinancing to small businesses in
third-world countries and other organizations that promote
entrepreneurship. Khosla is on the Board of Trustees at Carnegie Mellon
University. Khosla was an early signatory to the Giving Pledge and sits
on the Breakthrough Energy Ventures board.In April 2021, Khosla made an
offer to fund oxygen imports for hospitals in India amid the ongoing
COVID-19 pandemic. Martins Beach dispute Since 2010, Khosla has been
engaged in a legal dispute regarding public access to Martins Beach,
several miles south of Half Moon Bay, California, where he owns adjacent
land. Martins Beach was a popular family beach and surf spot before
Khosla purchased the property adjacent to the beach and blocked access
with a gate, armed guards at the road entrance and painting over the
welcome sign.In August 2017, a Californian court of appeals ruled that
Khosla must restore public access to Martins Beach. The plaintiffs
stated that they expected Khosla to take the case to the US Supreme
Court. In October 2018, the Supreme Court announced that it would not
hear the appeal of the California appeals court decision. In November
2018, a San Mateo County court found that the prior owners of the
property had not intended for access to Martins Beach to be public. In
January 2020, the California Coastal Commission sued Khosla, alleging he
was in violation of the California Coastal Act of 1976. References
External links Shaffer, Richard (1 July 2008). \"The King of Green
Investing\". Fast Company. Biofuels: Think Outside The Barrel on YouTube
(2006-03-29)
