The process of weighting involves emphasizing the contribution of
particular aspects of a phenomenon (or of a set of data) over others to
an outcome or result; thereby highlighting those aspects in comparison
to others in the analysis. That is, rather than each variable in the
data set contributing equally to the final result, some of the data is
adjusted to make a greater contribution than others. This is analogous
to the practice of adding (extra) weight to one side of a pair of scales
in order to favour either the buyer or seller. While weighting may be
applied to a set of data, such as epidemiological data, it is more
commonly applied to measurements of light, heat, sound, gamma radiation,
and in fact any stimulus that is spread over a spectrum of frequencies.
Weighting and loudness In the measurement of loudness, for example, a
weighting filter is commonly used to emphasise frequencies around 3 to 6
kHz where the human ear is most sensitive, while attenuating very high
and very low frequencies to which the ear is insensitive. A commonly
used weighting is the A-weighting curve, which results in units of dBA
sound pressure level. Because the frequency response of human hearing
varies with loudness, the A-weighting curve is correct only at a level
of 40-phon and other curves known as B-, C- and D-weighting are also
used, the latter being particularly intended for the measurement of
aircraft noise. Weighting in audio measurement In broadcasting and audio
equipment measurements 468-weighting is the preferred weighting to use
because it was specifically devised to allow subjectively valid
measurements on noise, rather than pure tones. It is often not realised
that equal loudness curves, and hence A-weighting, really apply only to
tones, as tests with noise bands show increased sensitivity in the 5 to
7 kHz region on noise compared to tones. Other weighting curves are used
in rumble measurement and flutter measurement to properly assess
subjective effect. In each field of measurement, special units are used
to indicate a weighted measurement as opposed to a basic physical
measurement of energy level. For sound, the unit is the phon (1 kHz
equivalent level). In the fields of acoustics and audio engineering, it
is common to use a standard curve referred to as A-weighting, one of a
set that are said to be derived from equal-loudness contours. Weighting
and gamma rays In the measurement of gamma rays or other ionising
radiation, a radiation monitor or dosimeter will commonly use a filter
to attenuate those energy levels or wavelengths that cause the least
damage to the human body but letting through those that do the most
damage, so any source of radiation may be measured in terms of its true
danger rather than just its strength. The resulting unit is the sievert
or microsievert. Weighting and television colour components Another use
of weighting is in television, in which the red, green and blue
components of the signal are weighted according to their perceived
brightness. This ensures compatibility with black and white receivers
and also benefits noise performance and allows separation into
meaningful luminance and chrominance signals for transmission. Weighting
and UV factor derivation for sun exposure Skin damage due to sun
exposure is very wavelength dependent over the UV range 295 to 325 nm,
with power at the shorter wavelength causing around 30 times as much
damage as the longer one. In the calculation of UV Index, a weighting
curve is used which is known as the McKinlay-Diffey Erythema action
spectrum.\[1\] Archived 2010-06-13 at the Wayback Machine See also Audio
quality measurement G-weighting M-weighting Z-weighting ITU-R 468 noise
weighting Psophometric weighting Weight function External links Noise
measurement briefing Archived 2008-06-30 at the Wayback Machine
Calculator for A,C,U, and AU weighting values A-weighting filter circuit
for audio measurements Archived 2016-12-31 at the Wayback Machine AES
pro audio reference definition of \"weighting filters\" What is a
decibel? Weighting filter according DIN EN 61672-1 2003-10 (DIN-IEC 651)
Calculation: frequency f to dBA and dBC
