Wolfram Mathematica is a software system with built-in libraries for
several areas of technical computing that allow machine learning,
statistics, symbolic computation, data manipulation, network analysis,
time series analysis, NLP, optimization, plotting functions and various
types of data, implementation of algorithms, creation of user
interfaces, and interfacing with programs written in other programming
languages. It was conceived by Stephen Wolfram, and is developed by
Wolfram Research of Champaign, Illinois. The Wolfram Language is the
programming language used in Mathematica. Mathematica 1.0 was released
on June 23, 1988 in Champaign, Illinois and Santa Clara, California.
Notebook interface Mathematica is split into two parts: the kernel and
the front end. The kernel interprets expressions (Wolfram Language code)
and returns result expressions, which can then be displayed by the front
end. The original front end, designed by Theodore Gray in 1988, consists
of a notebook interface and allows the creation and editing of notebook
documents that can contain code, plaintext, images, and
graphics.Alternatives to the Mathematica front end include Wolfram
Workbench---an Eclipse-based integrated development environment (IDE)
that was introduced in 2006. It provides project-based code development
tools for Mathematica, including revision management, debugging,
profiling, and testing.There is also a plugin for IntelliJ IDEA-based
IDEs to work with Wolfram Language code that in addition to syntax
highlighting can analyze and auto-complete local variables and defined
functions. The Mathematica Kernel also includes a command line front
end.Other interfaces include JMath, based on GNU Readline and
WolframScript which runs self-contained Mathematica programs (with
arguments) from the UNIX command line. The file extension for
Mathematica files is .nb and .m for configuration files. Mathematica is
designed to be fully stable and backwards compatible with previous
versions. High-performance computing Capabilities for high-performance
computing were extended with the introduction of packed arrays in
version 4 (1999) and sparse matrices (version 5, 2003), and by adopting
the GNU Multi-Precision Library to evaluate high-precision arithmetic.
Version 5.2 (2005) added automatic multi-threading when computations are
performed on multi-core computers. This release included CPU-specific
optimized libraries. In addition Mathematica is supported by third party
specialist acceleration hardware such as ClearSpeed.In 2002,
gridMathematica was introduced to allow user level parallel programming
on heterogeneous clusters and multiprocessor systems and in 2008
parallel computing technology was included in all Mathematica licenses
including support for grid technology such as Windows HPC Server 2008,
Microsoft Compute Cluster Server and Sun Grid. Support for CUDA and
OpenCL GPU hardware was added in 2010. Extensions As of Version 13,
there are 6,051 built-in functions and symbols in the Wolfram Language.
Stephen Wolfram announced the launch of the Wolfram Function Repository
in June 2019 as a way for the public Wolfram community to contribute
functionality to the Wolfram Language. At the time of Stephen Wolfram\'s
release announcement for Mathematica 13, there were 2,259 functions
contributed as Resource Functions. In addition to the Wolfram Function
Repository, there is a Wolfram Data Repository with computable data and
the Wolfram Neural Net Repository for machine learning.Wolfram
Mathematica is the basis of the Combinatorica package, which adds
discrete mathematics functionality in combinatorics and graph theory to
the program. Connections to other applications, programming languages,
and services Communication with other applications can be done using a
protocol called Wolfram Symbolic Transfer Protocol (WSTP). It allows
communication between the Wolfram Mathematica kernel and the front end
and provides a general interface between the kernel and other
applications.Wolfram Research freely distributes a developer kit for
linking applications written in the programming language C to the
Mathematica kernel through WSTP using J/Link., a Java program that can
ask Mathematica to perform computations. Similar functionality is
achieved with .NET /Link, but with .NET programs instead of Java
programs. Other languages that connect to Mathematica include Haskell,
AppleScript, Racket, Visual Basic, Python, and Clojure.Mathematica
supports the generation and execution of Modelica models for systems
modeling and connects with Wolfram System Modeler. Links are also
available to many third-party software packages and APIs.Mathematica can
also capture real-time data from a variety of sources and can read and
write to public blockchains (Bitcoin, Ethereum, and ARK).It supports
import and export of over 220 data, image, video, sound, computer-aided
design (CAD), geographic information systems (GIS), document, and
biomedical formats. In 2019, support was added for compiling Wolfram
Language code to LLVM.Version 12.3 of the Wolfram Language added support
for Arduino. Computable data Mathematica is also integrated with Wolfram
Alpha, an online answer engine that provides additional data, some of
which is kept updated in real time, for users who use Mathematica with
an internet connection. Some of the data sets include astronomical,
chemical, geopolitical, language, biomedical, airplane, and weather
data, in addition to mathematical data (such as knots and polyhedra).
Reception BYTE in 1989 listed Mathematica as among the \"Distinction\"
winners of the BYTE Awards, stating that it \"is another breakthrough
Macintosh application \... it could enable you to absorb the algebra and
calculus that seemed impossible to comprehend from a textbook\".
Mathematica has been criticized for being closed source. Wolfram
Research claims keeping Mathematica closed source is central to its
business model and the continuity of the software. See also References
External links Official website Mathematica Documentation Center A
little bit of Mathematica history documenting the growth of code base
and number of functions over time
